API publications necessarily address problems of a general nature. With respect to particular circumstances, local, 
        state, and federal laws and regulations should be reviewed.

        Neither API nor any of API's employees, subcontractors, consultants, committees, or other assignees make any 
        warranty or representation, either express or implied, with respect to the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of the 
        information contained herein, or assume any liability or responsibility for any use, or the results of such use, of any 
        information or process disclosed in this publication. Neither API nor any of API's employees, subcontractors, 
        consultants, or other assignees represent that use of this publication would not infringe upon privately owned rights.

        API is not undertaking to meet the duties of employers, manufacturers, or suppliers to warn and properly train and 
        equip their employees, and others exposed, concerning health and safety risks and precautions, nor undertaking their 
        obligations to comply with authorities having jurisdiction.

        Information concerning safety and health risks and proper precautions with respect to particular materials and 
        conditions should be obtained from the employer, the manufacturer or supplier of that material, or the material safety 
        datasheet.

        Where applicable, authorities having jurisdiction should be consulted.

        Work sites and equipment operations may differ. Users are solely responsible for assessing their specific equipment 
        and premises in determining the appropriateness of applying the recommended practice (RP). At all times users 
        should employ sound business, scientific, engineering, and judgment safety when using this RP.

        API publications may be used by anyone desiring to do so.  Every effort has been made by the Institute to assure the 
        accuracy and reliability of the data contained in them; however, the Institute makes no representation, warranty, or 
        guarantee in connection with this publication and hereby expressly disclaims any liability or responsibility for loss or 
        damage resulting from its use or for the violation of any authorities having jurisdiction with which this publication may 
        conflict.

        API publications are published to facilitate the broad availability of proven, sound engineering and operating 
        practices. These publications are not intended to obviate the need for applying sound engineering judgment 
        regarding when and where these publications should be utilized. The formulation and publication of API publications 
        is not intended in any way to inhibit anyone from using any other practices.

        Any manufacturer marking equipment or materials in conformance with the marking requirements of an API standard 
        is solely responsible for complying with all the applicable requirements of that standard. API does not represent, 
        warrant, or guarantee that such products do in fact conform to the applicable API standard.

        Nothing contained in any API publication is to be construed as granting any right, by implication or otherwise, for the 
        manufacture, sale, or use of any method, apparatus, or product covered by letters patent. Neither should anything 
        contained in the publication be construed as insuring anyone against liability for infringement of letters patent.

        Shall: As used in a standard, “shall” denotes a minimum requirement in order to conform to the specification.

        Should: As used in a standard, “should” denotes a recommendation or that which is advised but not required in order 
        to conform to the specification.

        This document was produced under API standardization procedures that ensure appropriate notification and 
        participation in the developmental process and is designated as an API standard. Questions concerning the 
        interpretation of the content of this publication or comments and questions concerning the procedures under which 
        this publication was developed should be directed in writing to the Director of Standards, American Petroleum 
        Institute, 1220 L Street, NW, Washington, DC 20005. Requests for permission to reproduce or translate all or any part 
        of the material published herein should also be addressed to the director.

        Generally, API standards are reviewed and revised, reaffirmed, or withdrawn at least every five years. A one-time 
        extension of up to two years may be added to this review cycle. Status of the publication can be ascertained from the 
        API Standards Department, telephone (202) 682-8000. A catalog of API publications and materials is published 
        annually by API, 1220 L Street, NW, Washington, DC 20005.

        Suggested revisions are invited and should be submitted to the Standards Department, API, 1220 L Street, NW, 
        Washington, DC 20005, standards@api.org.

          This recommended practice (RP) covers the design, maintenance, inspection, and mitigation practices to address 
          external corrosion under insulation (CUI) and corrosion under fireproofing (CUF). The document discusses the external 
          corrosion of carbon and low alloy steels under insulation and fireproofing and the external chloride stress corrosion 
          cracking (ECSCC) of austenitic and duplex stainless steels under insulation. The document does not cover atmospheric 
          corrosion or corrosion at uninsulated pipe supports but does discuss corrosion at insulated pipe supports.

          The purpose of this RP is to:

          —   help owner/users understand the complexity of the many CUI/CUF issues;

          —   provide owner/users with understanding on the advantages and limitations of the various nondestructive 
              examination methods used to identify CUI and CUF damage;

          —   provide owner/users with an approach to risk assessment (i.e. likelihood of failure and consequence of failure) for 
              CUI and CUF damage; and

          —   provide owner/users guidance on how to design, install, and maintain insulation systems to avoid CUI and CUF 
              damage.

          The practices described in this document apply to pressure vessels, piping, and storage tanks and spheres. The 
          document discusses the factors impacting the damage mechanisms, the guidelines to prevent external corrosion/
          cracking under insulation, the maintenance practices to avoid damage, the inspection practices to detect/assess 
          damage, and the guidelines for risk assessment of equipment or structural steel subject to CUI and CUF damage.

          The following referenced documents are indispensable for the application of this document. For dated references, 
          only the edition cited applies. For undated references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any 
          amendments) applies. 

          API 510, Pressure Vessel Inspection Code: In-service Inspection, Rating, Repair, and Alteration

          API 570, Piping Inspection Code

          API Recommended Practice 571, Damage Mechanisms Affecting Fixed Equipment in the Refining Industry

          API Recommended Practice 572, Inspection Practices for Pressure Vessels  

          API Recommended Practice 574, Inspection Practices for Piping System Components

          API Recommended Practice 575, Guidelines and Methods for Inspection of Existing Atmospheric and Low-pressure 
          Storage Tanks

          API Recommended Practice 580, Risk-Based Inspection

          API Recommended Practice 581, Risk-Based Inspection Technology

          API Recommended Practice 653, Tank Inspection, Repair, Alteration, and Reconstruction

          API Technical Report 938-C, Use of Duplex Stainless Steels in the Oil Refining Industry

        API Publication 2218, Fireproofing Practices in Petroleum and Petrochemical Processing Plants

        ASCE 7 1, Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures

        ASME PCC-2 2, Repair of Pressure Equipment and Piping 

        ASTM C692-08e1 3, Standard Test Method for Evaluating the Influence of Thermal Insulations on External Stress 
        Corrosion Cracking Tendency of Austenitic Stainless Steel

        ASTM C795, Standard Specification for Thermal Insulation for Use in Contact with Austenitic Stainless Steel

        ASTM C871, Standard Test Methods for Chemical Analysis of Thermal Insulation Materials for Leachable Chloride, 
        Fluoride, Silicate and Sodium Ions

        ASTM STP 880, Corrosion of Metals Under Thermal Insulation

        BSI BS 2972 4, Methods of test for Inorganic thermal insulating materials

        IMMM EFC 55 5,Corrosion-Under-Insulation (CUI) Guidelines

        ISO TS 24817 6,   Petroleum, petrochemical and natural gas industries—Composite repairs for pipework—
        Qualification and design, installation, testing and inspection

        NACE SP0198-2010 7,   Control of Corrosion Under Thermal Insulation and Fireproofing Materials—A Systems 
        Approach

        NFPA 58 8, Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code

        OSHA 29 CFR Part 1910.1001 9, Occupational Safety and Health Standards—Asbestos

        3  Terms, Definitions, Acronyms, and Abbreviations
        3.1  Terms and Definitions

        For the purposes of this document, the following terms and definitions apply.

        3.1.1 
        ablative coating
        A coating that is designed to dissipate heat by oxidative erosion of a heat protection layer (i.e. charring) while 
       protecting the underlying metal substrate.

        1 American Society of Civil Engineers, 1801 Alexander Bell Dr., Reston, Virginia 20191, www.asce.org.
        2 ASME International, 3 Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016-5990, www.asme.org.
        3 ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania 19428, www.astm.org.
        4 British Standards Institution, Chiswick High Road, London W4 4AL, United Kingdom, www.bsi-global.com.
        5 Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining, 1 Carlton House Terrace, London SW1Y 5DB, United Kingdom, www.iom3.org.
        6 International Organization for Standardization, 1, ch. de la Voie-Creuse, Case postale 56, CH-1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland, 
          www.iso.org.
        7 NACE International (formerly the National Association of Corrosion Engineers), 1440 South Creek Drive, Houston, Texas 
          77218-8340, www.nace.org.
        8 National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, www.nfpa.org.
        9 U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 
          20210, www.osha.gov.
        10 Underwriters Laboratories, 333 Pfingsten Road, North Brook, Illinois 60062, www.ul.com.

          3.1.2 
          aerogel
          A homogeneous, low-density solid state material derived from a gel, in which the liquid component of the gel has 
          been replaced with a gas. The resulting material has a porous structure with an average pore size below the mean 
          free path of air molecules at standard atmospheric pressure and temperature.

          3.1.3 
          americium 241
          Nuclear isotope that emits fast, high-energy neutron radiation. Used to detect slow, thermal neutrons generated by 
          collision with hydrogen atoms.

          3.1.4 
          amphoteric
          Capable of reacting chemically either as an acid or as a base. 

          3.1.5 
          calcium silicate
          Insulation that is composed principally of hydrous calcium silicate and usually contains reinforcing fibers.

          3.1.6 
          cellular glass
          Insulation that is composed of glass processed to form a rigid foam having a predominately closed-cell structure.

          3.1.7 
          cementitious coating
          A coating that contains Portland cement as one of its components and is held onto the applied substrate by a binder.

          3.1.8 
          cladding
          See jacketing.

          3.1.9 
          cobalt 60
          Nuclear isotope that emits gamma radiation with far greater penetrating power than iridium 192. Used to expose 
          radiographic film, computed radiography (CR) plates, and digital radiography (DR) detectors.

          3.1.10 
          cold piping
          Piping systems normally operating below the dew point.

          3.1.11 
          comparator block
          A steel object such as a steel ball or block used to calculate the geometric unsharpness factor for distortion on a 
          radiograph of a wall pipe. The geometric unsharpness factor is then used to calculate the true thickness of the pipe wall.

          3.1.12 
          composite wrap
          A wrapping system composed of multiple nonmetallic fiber/polymer layers to repair corroded piping. 

          3.1.13 
          corrosion under fireproofing
          Corrosion of piping, pressure vessels, and structural components resulting from water trapped under fireproofing.



        3.1.14 
        corrosion under insulation
        CUI
        External corrosion of carbon steel piping, pressure vessels, and structural components resulting from water trapped 
        under insulation. ECSCC of austenitic and duplex stainless steel under insulation is also classified as CUI damage.

        3.1.15 
        dead-leg
        Section of piping of a system where there is no significant flow. Examples include: blanked branches, lines with 
       normally closed block valves, lines that have one end blanked, pressurized dummy support legs, stagnant control 
       valve bypass piping, spare pump piping, level bridles, relief valve inlet and outlet header piping, pump trim bypass 
       lines, high point vents, sample points, drains, bleeders, and instrument connections. 

        3.1.16 
        deluge system
        A network of open sprinklers that are all connected to water main pipe. When activation of the system takes place, all 
        the sprinklers within the hazard zone are activated.

        3.1.17 
        dense concrete fireproofing
        Concretes made with Portland cement that can be formed in place or pneumatically sprayed to the required thickness 
        using steel reinforcement.

        3.1.18 
        expanded perlite
        A natural volcanic glass similar to obsidian that has been finely ground and subjected to extreme heat, causing the 
        particles to become considerably expanded and porous because of release of water.

        3.1.19 
        external chloride stress corrosion cracking
        ECSCC
        Surface initiated cracking in austenitic and duplex stainless steels and some nickel base alloys under the combined 
       action of tensile stress, temperature, and an aqueous chloride environment.

        3.1.20 
        fireproofing
systematic process, including materials and the application of materials that provide a degree of fire resistance for 
       protected substrates and assemblies.

        3.1.21 
        fluoroscopy
        Real-time X-ray system based on the principal of fluorescing screens.

        3.1.22 
        gadolinium 153
        Nuclear isotope that emits gamma radiation.

        3.1.23 
        gamma radiation
        Photons or packets of energy emitted from certain nuclear isotopes such as iridium 192 or cobalt 60.

        3.1.24 
        ice lens
        A localized zone of ice accumulation.

          3.1.25 
          ice-to-air interface
          Transition points on cold service insulation systems operating below the freezing point that forms an ice-to-air 
          interface. Depending on time of year (such as summer and winter months), the size of the ice at these locations 
          change by continually freezing and thawing.

          3.1.26 
          intumescent coating
          A fire retardant coating that, when heated, produces nonflammable gases that are trapped by the film, converting 
          them to a foam and thereby insulating the substrate. 

          3.1.27 
          iridium 192
Nuclear isotope that emits gamma radiation. Used to expose radiographic film.

          3.1.28 
          jacketing
          The protective covering that is applied over insulation. Also referred to as sheathing or cladding. 

          3.1.29 
          lagging
          Another name for insulation.

          3.1.30 
          lightweight cementitious fireproofing
          A sprayed or troweled coating formulated from Portland cement and lightweight aggregate such as vermiculite, 
          perlite, and diatomite in place of the usual sand and stone.

          3.1.31 
          lightweight concrete fireproofing
          A concrete that uses very light aggregate, such as vermiculite or perlite (instead of gravel), with cements that are 
          resistant to high temperatures.

          3.1.32 
          mastic
          A pasty material used as a protective coating or cement.

          3.1.33 
          mineral fiber
          Insulation composed principally of fibers manufactured from rock, slag, or glass, with or without binders.

          3.1.34 
          mineral wool
          A synthetic vitreous fiber insulation made by melting predominantly igneous rock, and/or furnace slag, and other 
          inorganic materials and then physically forming the melt into fibers. To form an insulation product, there are often 
          other materials applied to the mineral wool such as binders, oils, etc.

          3.1.35 
          neutron backscatter testing
          A test method that uses high-energy (fast) neutrons to detect the presence of hydrogen atoms.

          3.1.36 
          perlite
          Natural volcanic material that is heat expanded to a form used for lightweight concrete aggregate and fireproofing.


        3.1.37 
        photolysis
        Chemical decomposition of polystyrene foam caused by light or other electromagnetic radiation.

        3.1.38 
        polyisocyanurate foam
        A closed-cell, thermoset, plastic foam formed by combining isocyanurate, polyol, surfactants, catalysts, and blowing 
        agents.

        3.1.39 
        PT
        Liquid penetrant examination method.

        3.1.40 
        pulsed eddy current examination method
        PEC
        An eddy current examination method that uses a stepped or pulsed input signal instead of a continuous signal used 
        by conventional eddy current techniques. This technique has a greater penetration depth and is less sensitive to lift-
        off than conventional eddy current techniques.

        3.1.41 
        real-time radiographic examination method
        RTR
        A nondestructive test method whereby an image is produced electronically rather than on film so that very little lag 
        time occurs between the item being exposed to radiation and the resulting image.

        3.1.42 
        reliability-centered maintenance
        A process used to determine the maintenance requirements of any physical asset in its operating context.

        3.1.43 
        sheathing
        See jacketing.

        3.1.44 

        Steel shaped for use in construction including I-beams, vessel skirts, and saddles for exchangers and other horizontal 
       vessels.

        3.1.45 
        subliming compound
        A coating where the active ingredient absorbs heat as it changes directly from a solid to a gas phase. As in the case 
        of ablative coatings, intumescents are incorporated to provide an additional insulating layer.

        3.1.46 
        transition points
        Protrusions through the insulation system (e.g. vents, drains, supports, nozzles, instrument connections, etc.) on 
        carbon steel piping and equipment operating at below ambient or cold service temperatures (includes those operating 
       below 10 °F).

        3.1.47 
        vermiculite
        A group of minerals characterized by their ability to expand into long, wormlike strands when heated. This expansion 
        process is called exfoliation.


          3.1.48 
          X-ray
          Photons or packets of energy emitted from the cathode ray tube of an X-ray unit when the cathode is bombarded with 
          electrons.

          3.2  Acronyms and Abbreviations
          For the purposes of this document, the following acronyms and abbreviations apply.

            AWT          average wall thickness
            CR           computed radiography
            CUI corrosion under insulation
            CUF          corrosion under fireproofing
            DR           digital radiography
            ECSCC        external chloride stress corrosion cracking
            EPS expanded polystyrene
            ET           eddy current examination method
            FFS          Fitness-For-Service
            GWT          guided wave examination method
            IR infrared imaging
            MOC management of change
            NIA National Insulation Association
            NPS          nominal pipe size
            OD outside diameter
            PEC          pulsed eddy current examination method
            PT           liquid penetrant examination method
            PSP          photostimulable phosphor
            PSV          pressure safety valve
            PVC          polyvinyl chloride
            RBI risk-based inspection
            RTR          real-time radiographic examination method
            SCC stress corrosion cracking
            SIS          Swedish Standards Institute
            SSPC         Steel Structures Painting Council
            TSA          thermal spray aluminum
            UV ultraviolet
            VT visual examination method
			

          4   Introduction to the Causes of Damage 
          4.1  General

          Thermal insulation is used on the exterior of equipment and piping for a variety of reasons including:

          —   heat conservation [usually >200 °F (93 °C)],

        —   cold conservation (refrigeration systems) [usually <40 °F (10 °C)],

        —   personnel protection [usually >140  °F (60 °C)],

        —   freeze protection/heat tracing,

        —   condensation control,

        —   acoustic (noise) reduction,

        —   fire protection,

        —   process control.

        By contrast, fireproofing is used on structural steel solely to minimize, for a period of time, the impact of temperatures 
        generated during a fire on structural supports for pressure vessels (i.e. skirts) or piping (I-beams). Despite their 
        different applications, CUI and CUF are similar degradation mechanisms in that corrosion of the steel substrate may 
        occur in certain situations when water accumulates at the underlying steel surface. In stainless steels, CUI damage 
        takes the form of environmental cracking. 

        In addition to this document, a discussion of the causes of CUI and CUF damage, inspection methods for detecting 
       damage, and other CUI- and CUF-related topics can be found in API 571, ASTM STP 880, and IMMM EFC 55.

        4.2  CUI in Carbon and Low Alloy Steels


        4.2.1 General                                                                                 

        CUI is defined as the external corrosion of piping and vessels that occurs when water gets trapped beneath 
        insulation. CUI damage takes the form of localized external corrosion in carbon and low alloy steels. The factors that 
        affect the amount of CUI damage under insulation include:

        a) duration of the exposure to moisture,

        b) frequency of the exposure to moisture,

        c) corrosivity of the aqueous environment,

        d) condition of protective barriers (e.g. coating and jacketing),

        e) equipment design issues,

        f) service exposure temperature,

        g) insulation type,

        h) condition of weather barriers and caulking,

        i) type of climate,

        j) site maintenance practices,

        k) leaking steam-tracing systems, 

        l) proximity to humidity-causing equipment such as cooling towers,



9

          m) proximity to saltwater, and

          n) high industrial area acidic rain water.

          CUI damage is characterized by either general metal wastage or pitting due to the localized breakdown of passivity. It 
          is a form of oxygen corrosion, and occurs on carbon and low alloy steel when exposed to moisture and oxygen. 
          Damage occurs when water is absorbed by or collected beneath the insulation due to breaks in the insulation or 
          jacketing (cladding) and the moisture contacts the underlying exposed steel at metal temperatures between 32 °F 
          (0 °C) and 212 °F (100 °C). Water may come from numerous sources such as rainwater, a deluge system, spillage 
          from process operations, leaking steam tracing, or condensation on the metal surface in humid environments.

          When determining CUI susceptibility, a much broader operating temperature range should be considered, typically 
          from 10 °F to 350 °F (–12 °C to 175 °C) because of fluctuations in operating temperature, ineffective insulation 
          maintenance, temperature gradients within the equipment considered (long pipe runs, fractionation columns, heat 
          exchangers, etc.), and various operating modes. Contaminants in the insulation such as chlorides and sulfides may 
          contribute to the corrosivity of the environment.

          In some instances, these differences arise because users have reported actual metal temperature for CUI incidents, 
          other users have reported actual process temperature in reports of CUI damage, and some have introduced a margin 
          of safety. This has led to an expanding of the range where CUI damage may occur. The temperature range that CUI 
          damage is most severe depends on many different factors but in many areas has been found to be at metal 
          temperatures between 170 °F and 230 °F (77 °C and 110 °C) where corrosion reaction kinetics are the highest. 

          All operating conditions should be considered, including the out-of-service state, for equipment that is offline at 
          ambient temperatures for significant periods of time. Equipment that cycles in and out of the CUI range during 
          regeneration cycles, or is frequently out-of-service at ambient conditions, can experience aggressive CUI damage 
          even though when in normal operation it is outside the CUI temperature range.

          4.2.2  CUI Damage Below 32 °F (0 °C) and Above 212 °F (100 °C)

          The temperature range quoted for CUI can vary from one document to another, and may list temperatures where 
          liquid water would not be predicted [i.e. below 32 °F (0 °C) and above 212 °F (100 °C)]. This is because users 
          sometimes report the temperature where damage occurred based on the process operating temperature rather than 
          the actual metal surface temperature. The key factor for CUI damage to occur is that a corrosive aqueous layer be 
          present on the insulated metal surface during any operating period or during downtime. 


          Onepossible situation is where water breaches the insulation coming in contact with the metal surface temperature 
          between 212 °F and 350 °F (100 °C and 177 °C). CUI damage could be occurring as the result of continual flashing of 
          water at the hot metal surface that can concentrate chlorides on the metal surface. Even at surface metal temperatures 
          up to 600 °F (316 °C), CUI could occur during operation if water reaches the metal surface during a shutdown period and 
          flashes off during start-up. Another instance where CUI can occur is where deposits in a dead-leg reduce the surface 
          metal temperature sufficiently to allow CUI to take place. Other examples include nozzles, platform support protrusions, 
          etc. CUI damage may also occur in equipment operating at process temperatures below 32 °F (0 °C) as the result of 
          cyclic exposure conditions above 32 °F (0 °C) or frequent unit shutdown. It is more important to determine whether water 
          is breaching the insulation system rather than dwelling on what the exact temperature of the insulated metal surface 
          during normal operation. It should be noted that it is very difficult for insulation jacketing/cladding systems to be leak 
          tight. Section 7 and API 571 provide information on CUI inspection practices.

          4.3  CUI in Austenitic and Duplex Stainless Steels

          CUI damage in austenitic and duplex stainless steels is a form of ECSCC. As with all forms of stress corrosion 
          cracking (SCC), cracking occurs when a susceptible metallurgy is exposed to the combined action of a corrosive 
          environment and an applied/residual tensile stress. Susceptible materials include Type 300 series austenitic stainless 
          steels. Duplex stainless steels, though more resistant than austenitic stainless steels, are not immune. A corrosive 



        10                                      API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

        environment occurs when chlorides concentrate under the insulation at the surface of the austenitic stainless or 
        duplex steel when the insulation becomes wet. Residual cold work from fabrication or residual welding stresses 
        provides the tensile stresses necessary promote cracking. 

        Most CUI damage in austenitic stainless steels occurs at metal temperatures between 140 °F and 350 °F (60 °C and 
       175 °C) although exceptions have been reported at lower temperatures. Below 120 °F (50 °C), it is difficult to 
        concentrate significant amounts of chlorides; while above 350 °F (175 °C), water is not normally present and CUI 
        damage is infrequent. It should be noted that even austenitic stainless steel piping that normally operates above 
        500 °F (260 °C) can suffer severe ECSCC during start-up after insulation gets soaked from deluge system testing, 
       from fire water, or from rain during downtime. Typically, CUI damage in austenitic and duplex stainless steels goes 
       unnoticed until insulation is removed or a leak occurs. 

        CUI damage in duplex stainless steels occurs at higher temperatures than observed for austenitic stainless steels. 
       Figure 1 shows the results of SCC tests conducted on austenitic and duplex stainless steels. As can be seen from 
       these results, SCC of duplex stainless steels does not occur until about 285 °F (140 °C) at very high chloride 
        concentration levels. In general, there have been few reported cases of cracking in the industry, but those that have 
        been reported were under severe conditions where SCC could be predicted. Some of the failures reported have been 
        on offshore facilities and were attributed to ECSCC on relatively hot equipment. API 938-C discusses the use of 
        duplex stainless steels in the refining industry.


                               Figure 1—SCC Tendency of Austenitic and Duplex Alloys 



                                            CORROSION UNDER INSULATION AND FIREPROOFING                          11

          4.4  CUF in Carbon and Low Alloy Steels

          Fireproofing is used on structural steel, supporting piping, and pressure vessels in process units (i.e. I-beams and 
          skirts) to minimize the escalation of a fire that would occur with the failure of structural steel supporting piping and 
          pressure vessels. Fireproofing is designed to extend the time it takes for structural steel from reaching 1000 °F 
          (540 °C) and allow more time for site personnel to extinguish the fire. At 1000 °F (540 °C), the tensile strength of 
          carbon steel is reduced to roughly 50 % of its room temperature value and impacts the load-bearing ability of these 
          components. The premature failure of these structural supports could add significant fuel to the fire as the equipment 
          or piping collapse can result in loss of containment of other flammable fluids.

          Localized CUF damage tends to occur in highly industrialized areas with high SO2 levels in the atmosphere or marine 
          environments when operating, either continuously or intermittently, in the temperature range of 25 °F to 250 °F (–4 °C 
          to 121 °C). When high-chloride-containing water is used to mix concrete fireproofing, metal loss can be quite severe. 
          Some older installations involved solvent reduction (i.e. thinning) of the coating material with chlorinated solvents 
          when the coating was applied during hot, dry weather. Some of the chlorinated solvent can remain in the dried film 
          and produce hydrochloric acid with aging. In addition, prolonged exposure to heat at less than the design temperature 
          may allow for the slow release of acid and subsequent corrosion. This is because the intumescent response to heat is 
          acid activated and may not act instantaneously at the design temperature in response to a fire, typically 392 °F to 
          482 °F (200 °C to 250 °C). 

          The corrosion products resulting from CUF can promote cracking or spalling of the fireproofing. This occurs because 
          the corrosion products formed [i.e. essentially iron oxides (Fe2O3 and Fe3O4)] have a density that is roughly 33 % 
          lower than carbon steel. As a result, the corroded metal occupies a greater volume than the original uncorroded steel, 
          exerting tensile stresses on the fireproofing. Cracking of the fireproofing occurs when sufficient corrosion product 
          builds up between the fireproofing and the underlying steel. Cracking and staining of the fireproofing provide visual 
          evidence that corrosion is occurring on the underlying steel. 

          4.5  CUI on Aluminum Piping

          Aluminum piping is commonly used in processes that perform liquefaction of various gases. Because of the nature of 
          the process, extremely cold temperatures occur during operation. Condensation is common on the surface of piping 
          with the differential surface temperature as compared to ambient.

          In most cases, the aluminum piping exposed to cold temperature is insulated. At points of breach in the insulation, 
          moisture in the atmosphere condenses on cold pipe surfaces. Moisture on aluminum pipe in the presence of 
          differential materials such as carbon steel, stainless steel, or copper can initiate galvanic corrosion. 

          Insulation of complex piping geometry results in large areas of piping encapsulated within insulation boxes. Visual 
          inspection is not possible until insulation boxes are emptied. Wet areas within these encapsulation boxes create a 
          high probability of degradation due to corrosion. 

          Piping support equipment can cause accelerated corrosion points. An example of this accelerated corrosion is 
          stainless steel “U” bolts used to secure piping to structures or support ancillary items such as insulation.

          Ice forming on the pipe surface also creates a wet area and hinders visual inspection. Cyclic service creates 
          additional wet conditions during ice thaw.

          Saltwater ingress associated with residual stress and crevice corrosion can cause failure of aluminum piping by SCC.

          5   Areas Susceptible to Damage
          5.1  General

          Under the right temperature conditions, CUI or CUF damage can occur at any location that is insulated or fireproofed. 
          CUI and CUF are somewhat insidious in that regard. It is not uncommon to find CUI/CUF damage in locations remote 


         12                                            API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

         from the more predictable and susceptible locations. However, there are some areas within facilities that experience 
         has shown have a higher susceptibility for damage. In general, areas with severe CUF damage are easier to identify 
         visually than CUI damage because of cracks and staining of the fireproofing. Certain areas and types of equipment 
         have a higher susceptibility for CUI damage. 

         5.2   General Areas of Damage

         There are a number of locations in oil or chemical processing facilities where CUI damage or CUF has a higher 
         likelihood. Areas common to all equipment types are listed in Table 1.  

                                     Table 1—Locations for CUI Throughout Process Facilities
          Equipment Type                                            Potential Locations
          General areas     Areas downwind of cooling towers exposed to cooling tower mist
                            Areas of protrusions (i.e. transition points) through the jacketing at manways, nozzles, and other components 
                            Areas of protrusions through insulation for equipment/piping operating at or below ambient, or in cold service
                            Areas where insulation jacketing is damaged or missing
                            Areas where caulking is missing or hardened on insulation jacketing
                            Areas where the jacketing system is bulged or stained
                            Areas where banding on jacketing is missing
                            Areas where thickness monitoring plugs are missing
                            Areas where vibration has caused damage to the insulation jacketing
                            Areas exposed to steam vents
                            Areas exposed to process spills, the ingress of moisture, or acid vapors
                            Areas exposed to deluge systems
                            Areas insulated solely for personnel protection
                            Areas under the insulation with deteriorated coatings or wraps
                            Areas with leaking steam tracing
                            Pipe and flanges on pressure safety valves
                            Systems that operate intermittently above 250 °F (120 °C)
                            Systems operating below the atmospheric dew point
                            Systems that cycle through the atmospheric dew point
                            Ice-to-air interfaces on insulated systems that continually freeze and thaw

                                             Table 2—Locations for CUI/CUF on Vessels
           Equipment Type                                            Potential Locations
                              Insulation support rings below damaged or inadequately caulked insulation on vertical heads and bottom 
          Pressure vessels
                              zones
                              Stiffening rings on insulated vessels/columns in vacuum service
                              Insulated zone at skirt weld
                                                                                                                                       
                              Insulated leg supports on small vessels
                              Ladder and platform attachments
                              Termination of insulation at nozzles and saddles
                              Fireproofed skirts (CUF)
                              Anchor bolts (CUF)
                              Bottom of horizontal vessels (i.e. lower third to half of vessel)
                              Irregular shapes that result in complex insulation installations (e.g. davit arm supports, lifting lugs, body 
                              flanges, etc.)


Copyright American Petroleum Institute 
Provided by IHS under license with API                                Licensee=Formosa Plastics Group /5924677001, User=lee, min-che
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS      Not for Resale, 05/31/2015 20:17:35 MDT
                                            CORROSION UNDER INSULATION AND FIREPROOFING                          13

          All equipment is shut down at some time or other. The length of time and the frequency of the downtime spent at 
          ambient temperature may well contribute to the amount of CUI that occurs in the equipment. An example of damage 
          to the jacketing that would allow water to saturate the insulation is shown in Figure 2.

          5.3  Pressure Vessels

          In addition to the areas listed in Table 1, there are other areas in vessels, columns, drums, and heat exchangers 
          where CUI may have a higher likelihood. These are shown in Table 2.

          5.4  Piping

          5.4.1  General

          In addition to the areas listed in Table 1, there are other areas in piping where CUI may have a higher likelihood and 
          includes process piping, refrigerated piping, piping at or below grade, and pipe supports. Figure 3 shows a CUI failure 
          of piping in a compressor recycle line.

          Susceptible locations for CUI and CUF in piping are listed in Table 3.

          5.4.2  Cold Piping

          In this document, cold piping is considered to be piping carrying liquid or gases that cool the piping to temperatures 
          below the dew point. Cold piping is prone to corrosion because of condensation with CUI often occurring in locations 
          remote from the predictable and susceptible locations. The condensation present can freeze in cases where the 
          temperature of the outside surface of the piping decreases below freezing. In many cases, such as ammonia 
          terminals, piping temperatures can swing from ambient to –30 °F (–27 °C) during periods when ammonia is flowing in 
          the piping. This temperature swing leads to continuous freezing and thawing, and results in wet conditions that 
          increase the piping system susceptibility to CUI damage. Additionally, other equipment and components such as 
          tanks, pressure vessels, pipe supports, and flanges connected by this piping may be affected by the runoff of melting 
          ice or condensed water.

          Ice layers can form on piping operating at temperatures below freezing and can obscure the view of external surface 
          damage due to a continuous wet environment. In many cases, piping used for these cold temperature applications is 
          insulated. Frequent chilling and condensation accelerates corrosion at points where the insulation system is breached, 
          which exposes the surface of the piping to the atmosphere (i.e. ice-to-air interfaces). Water ingress, due to poorly sealed 
          insulation jacketing, can result in ice buildup causing swelling of the insulation and create a larger area of damage to the 
          insulation system. This repeated condition creates more and more exposure and susceptibility to corrosion.  



                    14                                                                                                         API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583


                                           Figure              2—Jacketed piping with missing insulation plug (top photo) allowing water ingress 
                             and subsequently corrosion on piping elbow (bottom photo).


Copyright American Petroleum Institute 
Provided by IHS under license with API                                                                                                                             Licensee=Formosa Plastics Group /5924677001, User=lee, min-che
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS                                                                                                   Not for Resale, 05/31/2015 20:17:35 MDT
                15


                                      Figure  3—CUI Failure of 4-in. Gas Compressor Recycle Line

                                          Table 3—Susceptible Locations for CUI/CUF in Piping
                        Equipment Type                                  Potential Locations
                      Piping               Dead-legs, vents, and drains
                                           Pipe hangers and supports
                                           Valves and fittings
                                           Bolted on pipe shoes
                                           Steam-tracing/electric-tracing tubing penetrations
                                           Termination of insulation at flanges and other piping components
                                           Carbon/low alloy steel flanges, bolting, and other components in high alloy piping
                                           Jacketing seams on the top of horizontal piping
                                           Termination of insulation on vertical piping
                                           Areas where smaller branch connections intersect larger diameter lines
Low points in piping with breaches in the insulation
                                           Close proximity to water (e.g. wharf) and/or ground (e.g. increased absorption) 
                                           Wet due to flooding or submerging into water
                                           Damage due to foot traffic


        Some common areas where breaches in insulation may occur and promote condensation are shown in Table 4.

                  Table 4—Susceptible Locations for CUI/CUF in Piping Operating Below the Dew Point
         Equipment Type                                    Susceptible Locations
        Cold piping       Pipe supports
                          Insulation termination areas such as pipe-to-flange locations
                          Flanges with stud bolts where insulation bonnets are installed but not sealed
                          Piping below flood grade where rising water penetrates the insulation jacketing causing ice lens with 
                          swelling that causes jacketing failure
                          High foot traffic areas where insulation is degraded by contact with human traffic
                          Areas on the insulation jacket showing signs of continual surface condensation or mold
                          Holes or cuts in the insulation vapor retarder or jacket
                          Ice-to-air interfaces

        5.4.3 Pipe Supports

        The accumulation of water can occur at locations remote from the point of intrusion, especially in services where the 
        surface temperature does not cause the water to evaporate. For example, this can occur on a horizontal line in the 
        middle of a span between pipe supports where the insulation is missing at the supports. Yet evaporated water may 
        also travel through the insulated system and condense in areas with a lower surface temperature. 

        There are many process units that operate at temperatures as low as –320 °F (–196 °C) in chemical plants, refineries, 
        and LNG facilities. In addition to supporting the piping and permitting limited movement, pipe supports in these 
        applications need to be insulated to increase the efficiency of the piping system by not allowing heat to transfer into 
        the process fluids contained in the piping.

        Whenever possible, pipe supports should be located outside the insulation system.

        5.5  Tankage and Spheres

        Susceptible locations for CUI and CUF damage in various equipment types are listed in Table 5. This includes 
        insulated tanks and spheres in both hot and cold service. Examples of CUI and CUF damage in tanks and spheres 
        are shown in Figure 4 and Figure 5.    

                                 Table 5—Locations for CUI/CUF in Tanks and Spheres
                    Equipment Type                         Susceptible Locations
                   Tanks/spheres     Area above chime
                                     Stairway tread attachments
                                     Insulation support rings
                                     Fireproofed legs on spheres (CUF)
                                     Insulation penetrations such as nozzles, brackets, etc. on shell and roof

        5.6  Heat-traced Systems

        Heat-tracing systems are used to protect pipes from freezing or to maintain process temperatures for piping that 
        transport substances that solidify or lose viscosity at ambient temperatures. Heat-traced systems are divided between 
        electric- and steam-traced systems. From a design perspective, electric-traced systems with chloride-free (i.e. non-PVC) 
       electrical insulation would be the preferred choice to minimize CUI damage in insulated systems. Though this may be 
        the preferred choice to minimize CUI damage, in reality, the majority of systems in use today are steam-traced systems. 



                                            CORROSION UNDER INSULATION AND FIREPROOFING                          17


                                         Figure 4—CUI at an Insulation Support Ring


                                        Figure 5—Failure of Sphere Legs Due to CUF

          When steam tracing fails, it defeats all CUI barriers. These systems often fail at coupling joints under the insulation. 
          When steam tracing fails under insulation, it introduces moisture, strips away protective coatings, and raises the metal 
          surface temperature within the CUI temperature regime. In addition, the same conditions can potentially cause 
          ECSCC on austenitic stainless steel pipe and instrument tubing under the insulation. It is good practice to locate heat 
          trace couplings outside the weather jacketing.
          5.7  Shutdown/Mothballing

          Equipment or piping systems that are shut down for extensive periods or mothballed also have higher susceptibility 
          for CUI and CUF damage. During extended idle periods, these weather barriers (i.e. insulation and fireproofing) can 
          deteriorate and lead to increased corrosion. Consideration should be given to removing insulation and fireproofing on 
          equipment and piping systems that are shut down for extended periods of time or as part of the mothballing 
          procedure, especially in moist and humid climates.



        6  Insulation and Fireproofing Systems
        6.1  Insulation Materials

        6.1.1 General

        Thermal insulation is important to facility operations yet is often overlooked and undervalued. These materials can be 
        used in either low- or high-temperature applications. Low-temperature insulations typically include polyurethane, 
        polyisocyanurate, flexible elastomeric foams, cellular glass, and phenolics. These insulation types normally require a 
        vapor barrier under the outer weatherproofing to minimize the potential for condensation of atmospheric moisture. 
        High-temperature insulations typically include perlite, calcium silicate, mineral wool, and cellular glass and fiberglass. 
        For refinery and petrochemical plant applications, insulation materials can be classified into one of the three 
        categories listed below: 

        —   granular,

        —   fibrous, or

        —   cellular.

        Table 6 lists the various types that are generally encountered in refining and petrochemical plants, along with the 
        applicable temperature ranges specified for each insulation material in the appropriate ASTM specifications. CUI has 
        been reported under all three types of insulation categories.

                                      Table 6—Commonly Used Insulation Materials

                  Insulation                             Low Temperature Range    High Temperature Range
                                   Material (ASTM)
                   Category                                  °F          °C           °F          °C
                 Granular     Calcium silicate (C533)        80          27         1200          650
                              Expanded perlite (C610)        80          27         1200          650
                              Silica aerogel (C1728)        –321        –197        1200          650
                 Fibrous      Mineral wool (C547)             0          –18        1800         1000
                              Fiberglass (C547)               0          –18        1000          540
                 Cellular     Cellular glass C552)          –450        –260         800          427
                              Polyurethane                See Note    See Note     See Note    See Note
                              Polyisocyanurate foam (C591)  –297        –183         300          150

                              Elastomeric foam (C534)       –297        –183         250          120               
                              Polystyrene foam (C578)       –297        –183         165          75
                              Phenolic foam (C1126)         –290        –180         257          125

                 NOTE  Check with manufacturer for high and low temperature limits for rigid or sprayed materials.

        6.1.2 Granular-type Insulations

        6.1.2.1 General

        Granular insulations are composed of small nodules that contain voids or hollow spaces. These materials are 
        sometimes considered open-cell materials since gases can be transferred between the individual spaces. Calcium 
        silicate and molded perlite insulations are considered granular insulations.



                                            CORROSION UNDER INSULATION AND FIREPROOFING                          19

          6.1.2.2 Calcium Silicate

          Calcium silicate insulation is rigid pipe and block insulation composed principally of calcium silicate which usually 
          incorporates a fibrous reinforcement. It is intended for use in high-temperature applications. If immersed in water at 
          ambient temperatures, the material can absorb significant amounts of water (i.e. up to 400 % by weight). Even when 
          not immersed in water, the material can absorb up to 25 % by weight water in high-humidity conditions because of its 
          hygroscopic nature. When exposed to water, the material has a pH of 9 to 10 and may be detrimental to alkyd or 
          inorganic zinc coatings. Additionally, some manufacturers offer products with controlled or low chloride levels for 
          specialty applications. The advantages and disadvantages for calcium silicate insulation are listed below.

          —   Advantages:

              —  low thermal conductivity (when dry),

              —  available in a variety of shapes/sizes,

              —  available with low chloride levels.

          —   Disadvantages:

              —  will readily absorb moisture,

              —  fragile (i.e. brittle) and requires care to avoid breakage during installation,

              —  chlorides can accumulate in service because of absorption and evaporation of water from the local 
                  atmosphere.

          6.1.2.3 Expanded Perlite

          Perlite is a volcanic rock containing from 2 % to 5 % bonded water. It is a chemically inert substance composed 
          basically of silica and aluminum. The perlite is expanded by means of rapid heating at a temperature between 
          1475 °F and 2200 °F (800 °C and 1200 °C). The vaporization of the bonded water and the formation of natural glass 
          results in the expansion of the perlite particles. These particles have a granular shape. 

          Expanded perlite insulation is either rigid pipe or block insulation composed of expanded perlite, inorganic silicate 
          binders, fibrous reinforcement, and silicone water-resistant additions. These silicone additions provide protection from 
          water absorption at temperatures below 600 °F (315 °C). The water resistance of the material is reduced at or above 
          this temperature. Similar to calcium silicate, some manufacturers offer expanded perlite products with controlled or 
          low chloride levels for specialty applications. The advantages and disadvantages for expanded perlite insulation are 
          listed below.

          —   Advantages:

              —  water-resistant up to 400 °F (205 °C),

              —  good resistance to mechanical damage,

              —  available in a variety of shapes/sizes.

          —   Disadvantages:

              —  more fragile than calcium silicate during installation,

              — higher thermal conductivity than calcium silicate.


Copyright American Petroleum Institute                                                                              
Provided by IHS under license with API                       Licensee=Formosa Plastics Group /5924677001, User=lee, min-che
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS Not for Resale, 05/31/2015 20:17:35 MDT
        20                                      API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

        6.1.2.4 Silica Aerogel

        Silica aerogel is a synthetically produced amorphous silica gel that is distinctly different from crystalline silica. It is 
       impregnated into a nonwoven flexible fabric substrate (i.e. batting) for reinforcement. Aerogels are good thermal 
       insulators because they almost nullify convective, conductive, and radiative heat transfer. Silica aerogels have an 
        extremely low thermal conductivity ranging from 0.03 W/m·K to 0.004 W/m·K that correspond to R-values of 14 to 105 
        for 3.5 in. thickness. Product forms can be as a flexible mat/blanket and include integral vapor barriers. The 
        advantages and disadvantages for silica aerogel insulation are listed below.

        —   Advantages:

            —  highest thermal performance of any insulating material known,

            —  significantly reduced thickness for equivalent performance to other insulating systems,

            —  wide range of temperature applications (Note: may require a change in specific product to cover hot or cold 
               insulation).

        —   Disadvantages:

            —  aerogels may be hygroscopic,

            —  need chemical treatment to be hydrophobic,

            —  typically higher cost of materials (Note: installed cost and performance may provide economic justification).

        6.1.3 Cellular-type Insulations

        6.1.3.1 General
                                                                                                                      
        Cellular insulations are classified as either open-cell structures where the cells are interconnecting or closed-cell 
        structures where the cells are sealed from each other. Generally, materials that have greater than 90 % closed-cell 
        content are considered to be closed-cell materials.

        6.1.3.2 Cellular Glass 

        Cellular glass (also referred to as foam glass) is a closed-cell insulation composed predominantly of silica-based 
        glass. It is made by adding powdered carbon to crushed glass and firing the mixture to form a closed-cell structure. It 
        is commonly used on electric-traced or steam-traced piping for freeze protection or process control. 

        The low permeability and absorption characteristics of cellular glass make it an attractive choice for cold service and 
        cryogenic applications. This insulation material does not wick water or liquids, and is used in hot service where the 
        nonabsorbent/nonwicking properties are desirable. The material has a thermal conductivity rating between mineral 
       wool and calcium silicate, and displays good compressive strength. It can be friable and brittle when subjected to 
        mechanical abuse, and can crack when subjected to large temperature differences and thermal shock. 

        Cellular glass has the chemical resistance of glass. The material can suffer vibration-induced damage, and can also 
        be prone to damage when boiling water is trapped between the pipe and the insulation. Cellular glass cells may break 
        down over time and trap water. Stress relief cracking of cellular glass can also occur at service temperatures above 
        450 °F to 500 °F (230 °C to 270 °C). The manufacturer should be consulted for the best method for insulating 
       systems operating above 450 °F (230 °C). 

        The advantages and disadvantages for cellular glass insulation are as follows.




          —   Advantages:

              —  does not absorb water,

              —  high resistance to mechanical damage when jacketed,

              —  thermal conductivity does not deteriorate with aging.

          —   Disadvantages:

              —  susceptible to thermal shock if temperature gradient >300 °F (>150 °C);

              —  easily abrades in vibrating service and fragile before application;

              —  higher price when compared to other insulation types.

          6.1.3.3 Organic Foams

          6.1.3.3.1 General

          This category of insulation materials includes polyurethane, polyisocyanurate, flexible elastomeric, polystyrene, and 
          phenolic insulations. Except for flexible elastomeric insulation, they are classified as either rigid/closed-cell foams or 
          flexible/closed-cell foams. Flexible elastomeric insulation is classified as flexible/closed-cell foam. These materials 
          contain chlorides, fluorides, silicates, and sodium ions that can be leached from the insulation at temperatures above 
          212 °F (100 °C). The leachate produced can have a wide range of pH (i.e. 1.7 to 10). Accelerated corrosion can take 
          place when the pH of the leachate is below 6. 

          6.1.3.3.2 Polyurethane Foam

          Polyurethane foam is an organic, closed-cellular foam that can be installed by spraying or casting in the shop or field. 
          Precast pieces are also available. Closed-cell foams are structures where all of the tiny foam cells are packed close 
          together with no interconnected pores. The foam cells are filled with a low-conductivity gas, usually 
          hydrochlorofluorocarbon, which helps the foam to rise and expand. It is an insulation product that is typically produced 
          on site, and applied by certified applicators. Two liquid components, an organic isocyanate compound (i.e. 
          diisocyanate) and an alcohol (i.e. polyol), are mixed at high or low pressure using a spray gun with the reacting mix 
          being sprayed onto the substrate to provide a seamless seal. 

          Polyurethane foam is frequently used for preinsulated pipe joints. It has low permeability and absorption  
          characteristics but can absorb water after prolonged service. The advantages and disadvantages for polyurethane 
          foam insulation are as follows.

          —   Advantages:

              —  low permeability and absorption characteristics (closed cell);

              —  multiple product forms and easy to apply in the field;

              — provides a seamless seal.

          —   Disadvantages:

              —  can be ignited and release toxic gases if exposed to an open flame;

              —  sensitivity to ultraviolet (UV) radiation (sunlight);



        22                                      API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

            —  can be vulnerable to some acids, caustics, solvents, hydrocarbons, and other chemicals;

            —  susceptible to long freeze-thaw cycles; cells can break open and become filled with water.

        6.1.3.3.3 Polystyrene Foam

        There are two categories of polystyrene foam insulation:

          1) expanded polystyrene (EPS) foam and

          2) extruded polystyrene (XPS) foam.

       EPS foam is a closed-cell insulation that is manufactured by expanding a polystyrene polymer. It is usually white and 
        made of pre-expanded polystyrene beads. It is an aromatic, thermoplastic polymer made from the monomer styrene 
        that is in solid (glassy) state at room temperature. When heated above 212 °F (100 °C), it flows sufficiently to permit 
        molding or extrusion, becoming a solid when cooled. 

        XPS is a rigid, closed-cell insulation manufactured from solid polystyrene crystals. The crystals are fed into an extruder 
        along with special additives and a blowing agent and melted into a viscous plastic fluid. After being forced through the 
        extrusion die, the hot, thick liquid expands to become foam that is shaped, cooled, and trimmed to dimension. This 
        continuous extrusion process produces a uniform closed-cell structure with a smooth continuous skin. 

        The advantages and disadvantages for polystyrene foam insulation are as follows.

        —   Advantages:

            — low thermal conductivity;

            —  excellent resistance to water and water absorption from freeze-thaw cycling;

            —  very stable and does not biodegrade;

            — resistant to photolysis.

        —   Disadvantages:

            —  like other organic compounds, polystyrene is flammable;

            —  when burned without enough oxygen or at lower temperatures, polystyrene can produce a number of 
               chemicals including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, carbon black, and carbon monoxide, as well as 
               styrene monomers, which can irritate eyes, nose, and respiratory system;

           —  primarily a cold system insulation material.                                                           

        6.1.3.3.4 Polyisocyanurate Foam

        Polyisocyanurate is an organic, closed-cellular, rigid foam. It has low permeability and absorption characteristics and 
        is typically used in cold service applications. The material is flexible and has reasonable strength to provide 
        resistance to light physical abuse. It has a low thermal conductivity. Disadvantages include combustibility and 
        sensitivity to UV radiation (sunlight). Combustion may release toxic gases. Chemical resistance is generally good but 
        can be vulnerable to some acids, caustics, solvents, hydrocarbons, etc.

        The advantages and disadvantages of polyisocyanurate foam insulation are as follows.



                                            CORROSION UNDER INSULATION AND FIREPROOFING                          23

          —   Advantages:

              —  low permeability and absorption characteristics;

              —  multiple product forms and easy to apply in the field.

          —   Disadvantages:

              — like other organic compounds, polyisocyanurate is flammable;

              —  primarily a cold system insulation material;

              —  when burned without enough oxygen or at lower temperatures, a number of chemicals are produced that 
                  can irritate eyes, nose, and respiratory system;

              —  repeated freeze-thaw cycles can cause cells to break open and become filled with water.

          6.1.4  Fibrous-type Insulations

          6.1.4.1 General

          This category of insulation materials includes mineral wool and fiberglass insulation. These materials are processed 
          from molten state into fibrous form and combined with organic binders and pressed into rolls or sheets. The fiber 
          length, fiber orientation, and type of binder used impact the ability of these materials to repel water. Upon breakdown 
          of the binder, the wicking ability of these materials increases significantly and transmits moisture or corrosive 
          solutions to the underlying surface. Mineral wools are unattractive to rodents but can provide a structure for bacterial 
          growth if allowed to become wet.

          6.1.4.2 Mineral Fiber

          Mineral fiber insulations are composed principally of fibers manufactured from rock, slag, or glass, with or without 
          binders. Molten glass, stone, or slag is spun into a fiberlike structure. Inorganic rock or slag is the main component 
          (typically 98 %) of stone wool. The remaining 2 % organic content is generally a thermosetting resin binder (an 
          adhesive) and a little oil. Though the individual fibers conduct heat very well, when pressed into rolls and sheets their 
          ability to partition air makes them excellent heat insulators and sound absorbers. Mineral fiber has a lower thermal 
          conductivity than calcium silicate and perlite. However, even with metal jacketing, mineral fiber is subject to 
          mechanical damage because of its low compressive strength and lack of resiliency. This can lead to reduced
          insulation thickness and possibly open jacket seams where the jacket has been crimped and exposing insulation to 
          moisture. If used at an elevated temperature, the organic binder that helps to hold the fibrous insulation together is 
          burned away causing a further reduction in strength. 

          Fibrous insulations are readily permeable to vapors and liquids. For this reason, fibrous insulation is not used alone 
          for low temperature applications where condensation can occur. Most fibers can readily wick hydrocarbons and water. 
          Sometimes hydrophobic treatments or coatings are applied to the insulation by manufacturer to reduce water 
          absorption and wicking. These coatings do not eliminate water saturation when immersed, and the coating 
          effectiveness may degrade in service after exposure to higher temperatures.

          The advantages and disadvantages for mineral wool insulation are as follows.

          —   Advantages:

              —  has a lower thermal conductivity than calcium silicate and perlite;

              —  low leachable chloride content (<5 ppm).



        24                                      API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

        —   Disadvantages:

            —  fibrous insulations are readily permeable to vapors and liquids;

            —  most fibers can readily wick hydrocarbons and water;

            —  mineral fiber is subject to mechanical damage because of its low compressive strength and lack of 
               resiliency;

            —  chlorides can accumulate in service because of absorption and evaporation of water from the local 
               atmosphere.

        6.1.4.3 Fiberglass

        Fiberglass is composed of pure glass containing various types of binders and is widely used as industrial insulation. 
        Fiberglass is mechanically weak like mineral fiber and shares the same disadvantages with respect to wicking and 
        permeability. The advantages and disadvantages for fiberglass insulation are as follows.

        —   Advantages:

            — noncombustible.

        —   Disadvantages:

            —  compressing the material reduces its effectiveness;

            — absorbs water;

            —  can cause skin allergies.

        6.2  Insulation Jacketing

        6.2.1 General

        Regardless of the type of thermal insulation, keeping water out starts with the protective jacketing. In addition, 
        insulation systems should also protect the insulation from mechanical abuse, chemical attack, and fire. The functions 
       performed by insulation jacketing include acting as a:

        —   barrier to protect the insulation and piping from weather (i.e. rain, snow, sleet, dew, wind, solar radiation, and 
            atmospheric contamination);

        —   vapor retarder to retard the passage of water vapor into the insulation;

        —   protective covering to prevent mechanical abuse (i.e. damage) of the insulation system by personnel, machinery, 
           etc.;

        —   condensate barrier to prevent moisture condensation on the inner surface of the metal jacket (sometimes called 
           moisture retarders).

        In many cases, jacketing may perform more than one of the functions listed above. For example, a metallic jacketing 
        may serve as protection from both weather and mechanical abuse.




          6.2.2  Jacketing Materials

          6.2.2.1 General

          Jacketing materials fall into two general categories, namely 

             1) metallic jacketing and 

             2) nonmetallic jacketing. 

          Metal jacketing is the most common jacketing material for insulation. 

          Metallic jacketing materials include aluminum, steel, and stainless steel. Nonmetallic jacketing materials such as 
          fiber-reinforced plastics and thermoplastics have limited use for jacketing applications because of their low melting 
          temperatures and their lack of resistance to mechanical abuse. 

          6.2.2.2 Metallic Jacketing

          Metal jacketing is supplied as thin sheets and can be smooth, corrugated, or embossed. The inner surface of metallic 
          jacketing may be coated or covered with a moisture-resistant film to retard corrosion of the jacketing. The types of 
          metallic jacketing materials include aluminum, aluminized steel, aluminum-zinc coated steel, galvanized steel, and 
          Type 304 stainless steel. The primary strengths of metallic jacketing are the long service life and the familiarity with its 
          use in refinery and chemical plant applications. The primary weaknesses of metallic jacketing are the difficulty to 
          effectively seal jacketing against moisture ingress and the vulnerability of joints to damage in service (i.e. from foot 
          traffic). When using metal jacketing, it is important to pay attention to draining of the insulation system as a whole and 

to provide a means of escape for moisture that has entered through the jacketing.

          Metal accessories such as banding, fasteners, washers, elbows, etc. for aluminum stainless steel jacketing are 
          typically Type 304 stainless steel, or Type 316 stainless steel for marine applications.

          6.2.2.3 Nonmetallic Jacketing

          Thermoplastic jackets are made from a variety of thermoplastic materials that include polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and 
          polyvinylidene chloride (PVDC), among others. Most often these materials are used for low-temperature applications. 
          They have a limited application in hydrocarbon plants usage since they have poor resistance to fire. They are used as 
          smooth sheet materials and are often selected in applications where cleanliness is important because they typically 
          have better release properties than metal and are thus more easily cleaned. The plastics also have good resistance 
          to a wide variety of chemicals and are not damaged by water. Nonmetallic jacketing falls into the following two main 
          classes.

          a) Preformed Jacketing—Preformed nonmetallic jacketing is supplied and applied in sheet form. The sheets are 
             generally made from chlorosulphonated polyethylene synthetic rubber (CSPE). The material may or may not be 
             reinforced with woven glass fiber reinforcement. Provided the appropriate adhesives are used, the material forms 
             water tight joint seals. It is much less prone to damage from foot traffic than metallic jacketing.

          b) Formed-in-place Jacketing—This type of jacketing is glass fiber reinforced epoxy or polyester applied to the outside 
             of the insulation in an uncured state, and is cured in place to form a rigid jacket. Epoxy jacketing is limited to long 
             straight pipe runs, liquefied natural gas loading lines for example, where factory based application is viable. 

          Polyester jacketing can be easily formed in the uncured state. The material cures rapidly when exposed to ambient 
          UV light. If necessary, UV lamps can be used to accelerate curing. UV curing polyester jacketing is easily sealed 
          because of good adhesion both to itself and to metallic jacketing overlaps. Once cured, it is resistant to mechanical 
          damage. Expansion/contraction joints may need to be installed to accommodate thermal expansion or contraction of 
          the piping during service to prevent cracking of the material. 



        26                                      API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

        Nonmetallic jacketing materials need to be periodically inspected to ensure that the effects of aging are not 
        compromising their fitness for purpose.

        6.2.2.4 Jacketing Thickness

        The National Insulation Association (NIA) has presented guidelines for jacketing thickness on vessels and storage 
        tanks. These guidelines for vessels are shown in Table 7 and Table 8. 

                                Table 7—NIA Guidelines for Sidewalls on Vertical Vessels
                                                                 Vessel Diameter
             Jacketing Material                          5 ft to ≤10 ft     10 ft to ≤20 ft      20 ft to 40 ft
                                     ≤5 ft (1.52 m)
                                                      (1.52 m to ≤3.05 m) (3.05 m to ≤6.10 m) (6.10 m to 12.19 m)
         Aluminum—smooth rolled    0.016 in. (0.41 mm) 0.016 in. (0.41 mm)       —                   —
         PVC—smooth rolled a       0.030 in. (0.76 mm)       —                   —                   —
         Aluminum—corrugated b            —           0.016 in. (0.41 mm) 0.024 in. (0.61 mm) 0.024 in. (0.61 mm)
         PVC—corrugated c                 —           0.050 in. (1.27 mm) 0.050 in. (1.27 mm)        —
         Aluminum—galvanized d            —                  —                   —            0.024 in. (0.61 mm)

         a Secured with minimum 1/2 in. × 0.015 in. (12.7 mm × 0.38 mm) stainless steel banding.

         b Paneling with 1 1/4 in. (31.75 mm) deep corrugations.

         c Secured with minimum 1/2 in. × 0.020 in. (19.05 mm × 0.51 mm) stainless steel banding.

         d Secured with minimum 1 1/4 in. × 0.020 in. (31.75 mm × 0.51 mm) stainless steel banding.

                                 Table 8—NIA Guidelines for Heads on Vertical Vessels
                                                                   Vessel Diameter
                      Jacketing Material                            10 ft to ≤30 ft      30 ft to 40 ft
                                               ≤10 ft (≤3.05 m)
                                                                  (3.05 m to ≤9.14 m) (9.14 m to 12.19 m)
                Aluminum—smooth rolled       0.024 in. (0.61 mm)  0.024 in. (0.61 mm) 0.032 in. (0.81 mm)
                Aluminum—smooth galvanized   0.016 in. (0.41 mm)  0.016 in. (0.41 mm) 0.024 in. (0.61 mm)
                Stainless steel—smooth       0.010 in. (0.25 mm)  0.016 in. (0.41 mm) 0.016 in. (0.41 mm)
                PVC—smooth                   0.040 in. (1.02 mm)  0.050 in. (1.27 mm)        —

        Metal jacketing is normally secured with stainless steel bands or screws. PVC jacketing is secured by solvent welding 
        the seams and screws where necessary. 

        For storage tanks, wind conditions are one of the most critical items to consider when evaluating a jacketing 
        system for large tanks. The tank size usually dictates the type of jacketing to be used over the insulation. Larger 
        tanks require heavier jacketing to overcome high winds on large tank areas. Though developed for buildings and 
       other structures, ASCE 7 provides design information on wind loading that is applicable to vertical wall and roof 
       jacketing on storage tanks.

        6.3  Caulking


        Caulking is used to seal insulation seams. Caulking is used to create a seal at junctions, terminations, and penetrations 
        in the insulation to prevent the ingress of water. Over time, insulation caulking dries out, cracks, and loses its seal, so it is 
        imperative to inspect for caulking deterioration and renew/replace damaged caulking to prevent moisture ingress.

        Once the metal jacketing is applied, the seams are often caulked with a silicone or other type of sealant to prevent the 
        ingress of water through the lap. In addition, there are extremely low permeability rated products such as 



                                            CORROSION UNDER INSULATION AND FIREPROOFING                          27

          polyvinylidene chloride resins that lock out oxygen and moisture. It is frequently used on urethane, extruded 
          polystyrene foam, and foam glass because of their excellent vapor barrier properties.

          6.4  Fireproofing Materials

          6.4.1  General

          There are a variety of fireproofing materials, each with their own unique physical and chemical properties. Factors to 
          consider when selecting a material for a fireproofing application include:

          a) weight limitations for supports (particularly for heavyweight concrete applications),

          b) fire resistance rating (in hours),

          c) adhesion strength and durability,

          d) ease of application and repair,

          e) corrosiveness of the atmosphere,

          f) corrosiveness of the fireproofing to the substrate,

          g) nonfire operating temperature limitations,

          h) anticipated life of the fireproofing material,

          i) maintenance requirements,

          j) potential for damage during maintenance operations,

          k) cost.

          A discussion of the various generic types of fireproofing is presented below. 

          6.4.2  Dense Concrete

          Concretes made with Portland cement that have densities between 140 lb/ft3 and 150 lb/ft3 (2200 kg/m3 and 
          2400 kg/m3) are considered dense concretes. They can be formed in place or pneumatically sprayed to the 
          required thickness using steel reinforcement. They are durable and can withstand thermal shock from impingement 
          from fire hose streams. 

          —   Advantages:

              —  withstands thermal shocks and fire hose streams;

              —  withstands flame impingement up to 2000 °F (1100 °C);

              —  performance extensively proven (±4 h protection).

          —   Disadvantages:

              — high weight;

              — high thermal conductivity;

              —  installation costly and time consuming.


        6.4.3 Lightweight Concrete

        Instead of using gravel as aggregate, lightweight concretes use very light aggregate such as vermiculite or perlite with 
        cements that are resistant to high temperatures. Lightweight concretes densities between 25 lb/ft3 and 80 lb/ft3
        (400 kg/m3 and 1300 kg/m3). Though usually applied by pneumatic spraying, they can also be troweled or poured in 
        place. Pneumatically sprayed material is denser than troweled or poured concrete.

        —   Advantages:

            —  lightweight material with better fire protection properties than dense concrete;

            —  can withstand flame impingement up to 2000 °F (1100 °C);

            —  can withstand thermal shocks and hose streams.

        —   Disadvantages:

            — porous material;

            —  moisture absorption leads to cracking and spalling in freezing climates;

            —  more susceptible to mechanical damage than dense concrete.

        6.4.4 Other Spray-applied Fire-resistant Materials

        6.4.4.1 General

        This category of fireproofing materials includes subliming and intumescent mastics, ablative coatings, intumescent 
        epoxy coatings, and inorganic coatings that are spray applied.

        —   Advantages:

            —  lightweight material with better fire protection properties than dense concrete;

            —  can withstand flame impingement up to 2000 °F (1100 °C);

            —  can withstand thermal shocks and hose streams.

        —   Disadvantages:

            — porous material;

            —  moisture absorption leads to cracking and spalling in freezing climates;

            —  more susceptible to mechanical damage than dense concrete.

        6.4.4.2 Sprayed Organic Coatings Subliming Mastics/Intumescent Mastics/Ablative Coatings

        Sprayed organic coatings are thin when compared to sprayed inorganic coatings. These materials are classified as 
       either intumescent mastics, ablative coatings, or subliming compounds.

        Intumescent mastics are normally composed of epoxy-based materials that expand when exposed to fire to form an 
        insulating char with a low thermal conductivity. This insulating char acts as a thermal barrier between the fire and the 
        substrate. During this reaction, toxic fumes and smoke are released at temperatures above 570 °F (300 °C). As a 


          result, intumescent mastics are not suitable for enclosed areas like accommodation modules or temporary safe 
          refuge areas on offshore structures.

          Ablative coatings are organic coatings that gradually erode under fire exposure because of the absorbed heat energy 
          from a fire that changes the virgin solid coating into a gas composite. This action prevents heat absorption into the 
          underlying substrate.

          Ablative coatings are organic coatings that need large amounts of energy to decompose or break down. They are 
          designed to reduce the rate of burn and usually contain fire retardant chemicals such as aluminum trihydrate or 
          antimony oxide. When exposed to fire, these coatings start to ablate by chemical and physical reactions (i.e. 
          evaporation, chemical cracking, or melting) and in the process consume large amounts of heat energy while keeping 
          the underlying substrate relatively cool for a certain length of time. The gases and vapors generated during the 
          ablative process push oxygen away from the surface, dilute flammable gases preventing them from burning, and 
          interrupt the “chain reaction” of the fire chemically. After decomposition of all organic components, a solid structure of 
          inorganic components remains offering further protection by insulation. 

          Subliming compounds have an active ingredient that absorbs heat as it changes from the solid to a gas phase (i.e. 
          sublimation). Similar to ablative coatings, subliming compounds are added to provide an additional layer for 
          insulation. The effectiveness of subliming compounds is a function of various elements including the coating material 
          thickness, compounds’ sublimation temperature and enthalpy at sublimation, heat capacity of the substrate, and fire 
          exposure. The fire depletes the subliming compounds. Therefore, once exposed, the protection provided by the 
          compound is reduced or eliminated. 

          —   Advantages:

              — quick application;

              — lightweight;

              —  suitable for use on existing supports that may not handle additional weight.

          —   Disadvantages:

              —  can be stripped away by firefighting activities and flash fires;

              —  susceptible to abrasion and mechanical damage.

          6.4.4.3 Sprayed Intumescent Epoxy Coatings

          A wide range of intumescent epoxy coatings are available. These can be described as a mix of thermally 
          reactive chemicals in a specific epoxy matrix formulated for fireproofing applications. Under fire conditions they 
          react to emit gases, which cool the surface while a low-density carbonaceous char is formed. This char then 
          serves as a thermal barrier.

          —   Advantages:

              —  excellent bonding and corrosion protection;

              —  lightweight and durable under nonfire conditions;

              —  good durability in severe jet fire tests.

          —   Disadvantages:

              —  possible char coating damage during fire if subjected to impingement from fire hose streams;

            —  requires expertise in application and may require multiple coats or special equipment to apply dual 
               components simultaneously;

            —  some concerns regarding potential toxicity of gases generated during fire conditions;

           —  sprayed coatings on loose components, such as valve/actuator covers, require care when handling in 
               freezing conditions.

        6.4.4.4 Sprayed Inorganic Coatings

        This class of materials is referred to as lightweight cementitious fireproofing materials and is usually based on cement 
        with a lightweight insulating aggregate of exfoliated vermiculite. They provide exceptional dimensional stability under 
       hydrocarbon fire exposure conditions. The exfoliated vermiculite has the capacity to relieve stresses created by both 
        hot and cold thermal shock when subjected to simultaneous exposure to fire and water impingement. These 
        vermiculite cements can perform equally well in multiple fires where no repair or replacements have been carried out.

        Vermiculite cements are noncorrosive to the structural or vessel surfaces. They are noncombustible and do not 
        produce toxic fumes during their exposure to fire. Since they are organic, they do not degrade with time. There are 
        examples of applications that have been in service for more than 40 years with little evidence of damage or corrosion 
        to the underlying substrate. 

        —   Advantages:

            — lightweight;

            —  vermiculite allows for denting instead of cracking or shattering;

            —  noncombustible and nontoxic when exposed to fire.

        —   Disadvantages:

            — properties vary greatly with composition;

            —  not suitable for high-vibration areas

            —  great care should be taken to ensure proper application thickness.

        6.4.5 Preformed Inorganic Panels or Masonry

        6.4.5.1 General

        These types of materials for fireproofing are focused on reducing installation costs and time. They also facilitate 
       reductions in weight and overall volume contribution to a structure thereby enhancing the operating efficiency of the 
       equipment. 

        6.4.5.2 Preformed Inorganic Panels

        Preformed, or prefabricated, fireproofing panels are based off many of the attributes commonly associated with 
        intumescent epoxy coatings: ease of application, reduced application times, reduced weight and volume contribution, 
        etc. Yet this form of passive fireproofing stands out on its own if only for the fact that it offers several unique 
        advantages as follows.


          —   Advantages:

              —  reduced tie-in connections/field joints;

              —  reduced steel erection costs and damage;

              —  lower maintenance costs;

              —  installation work unaffected by environmental conditions;

              —  easy access for inspection;

              — clean application;

              —  no curing time;

              — low thermal conductivity.

          —   Disadvantages:

              —  labor intensive installation when instrumentation/appurtenances attached to columns;

              —  susceptible to impact damage.

          6.4.5.3 Masonry Blocks and Bricks

          This category of insulation materials includes refractory clays and other ceramic materials. These materials are not 
          common for new construction but are present in existing facilities. Advantages and disadvantages for masonry 
          blocks/bricks are shown below.

          —   Advantages:

              — easy installation,

              — lightweight,


              —  availability in a wide array of sizes.                                                             

          —   Disadvantages:

              — high installation costs,

              — high maintenance,

              —  admits moisture and cracks through joints in the masonry.

          6.4.6  Endothermic Wrap Fireproofing

          This flexible, tough, inorganic sheet material with a bonded aluminum foil outer layer is formed from a maximum of 
          inorganic, highly endothermic filler and a minimum of organic binder and fiber. An endothermic wrap when exposed to 
          high temperatures keeps heat out by releasing chemically bound water to cool the outer surface used to protect 
          structural steel, and electrical cable trays/circuits in conduits. 

        It can be wrapped around a wide variety of potentially exposed vulnerable equipment. These wraps provide electric 
        cable trays with rated performance under ANSI/UL 1709 (or functionally equivalent) conditions. ANSI/UL 1709 covers 
        small- and full-scale test methods to measure the resistance of protective materials to rapid-temperature-rise fires. In 
        most applications, the wrap is held in place by stainless steel bands with foil tape and/or fireproofing caulk on seams, 
        gaps, and termination points. For structural steel in new construction, surface preparation of the substrate should 
        include fresh prime coating to provide corrosion protection.

        —   Advantages:

            —  systems are easily reentered/repaired, allowing retrofitting over steel without dissembling wiring and other 
               attached items;

           —  can be applied directly over existing cement or block where additional protection required;

           —  flexible endothermic wrap systems are explosion rated.

        —   Disadvantages:

            —  should be weatherproofed or stainless steel-jacketed when used outdoors;
weatherproofing should be done with manufacturers specified protection tape to preserve recommended 
               protection.

        6.5  Coatings Under Insulation and Fireproofing Systems

        6.5.1 General

        When moisture penetrates insulation and fireproofing systems, the surface of the underlying component will be 
        subjected to corrosion. In many situations, users apply coatings to the surface of the component before applying 
       insulation or fireproofing. Selecting the right coating is extremely important since the coating is the last line of defense 
        for keeping the electrolyte from the metal surface and preventing corrosion. 

        6.5.2 Factors to Consider When Selecting a Coating System

        There are a variety of issues that should be considered prior to selecting a coating for equipment that will be 
        insulated. These include the following.

        —   Under dry conditions, what is the maximum exposure temperature for the coating? 

        —   What is the maximum temperature resistance of the coating under immersion conditions?

        —   What is the minimum level of surface preparation required? 

        —   Is the coating product a single-component or multicomponent product? 

        —   What is the single coat dry film thickness? 

        —   Can the coating be recoated?

        —   What is the maximum surface temperature? 

        6.5.3 Coating Systems

        Examples of coating systems used under thermal insulation and fireproofing are presented in NACE SP0198. The 
       document discusses the suitable temperature ranges and surface preparation/surface profile requirements for each 


          coating system as well as the suggested prime coat and topcoat for each system. Coatings systems that are often 
          used in these applications include: 

          —   high-build epoxy systems,

          —   epoxy phenolic systems,

          —   epoxy novolac systems,

          —   air-dried or modified silicone systems,

          —   inorganic copolymer systems or inert multipolymetric coating systems,

          —   fusion-bonded epoxies,

          —   thermal spray aluminum (TSA) (with or without a thinned epoxy sealer or silicone coating),

          —   petrolatum or petroleum wax tape systems.

          6.5.4  Surface Preparation

          The key element to the long-term performance of a coating system is how well the surface is prepared to receive the 
          coating. Standards for surface preparation have been developed by various organizations including the Steel 
          Structures Painting Council (SSPC), the National Association of Corrosion Engineers (NACE), the Canadian General 
          Standards Board (CGSB), the Swedish Standards Institute (SIS), and the British Standards Institute (BS). A 
          comparison of these standards is shown in Table 9. 

                                   Table 9—Comparison of Surface Preparation Standards
                       System              SSPC     NACE           CGSB            SIS               BS
            Solvent clean                  SP-1       —              —              —                —
            Power tool clean               SP-3       —          31 GP 402         St, 3             —
            White-metal blast              SP-5       #1      31 GP 404 Type 1     Sa. 3      BS4232 first quality
            Commercial bast                SP-6       #3      31 GP 404 Type 2     Sa. 2      BS4232 third quality
            Brush-off blast                SP-7       #4      31 GP 404 Type 3     Sa. 1     Light blast to brush-off

            Near-white blast               SP-10      #2             —            Sa. 2 1/2  BS4232 second quality
            Power tool cleaning to bare metal SP-11   —              —              —                —

          For newly installed piping, CUI concerns are frequently addressed by the use of high-quality protective coatings or 
          TSA. However, this solution can be expensive for use in remediation. This high cost of remediation has contributed to 
          the current industry challenges associated with CUI. Therefore, one should consider initial long-term prevention 
          options. This cost and value of an initial prevention option may be assessed using a life cycle analysis based on the 
          remediation method selected. This analysis should consider the remediation costs, the future inspection costs, and 
          the costs associated with loss of containment as the result of failure of the equipment pressure boundary, etc. The 
          surface preparation for the application of most epoxy or metal filled paints can be extensive; some require grit blast to 
          white metal. In some cases the best alternative for remediation is to replace the entire section with new pipe. 

          For fireproofing, it is important to verify that the external coating is compatible with the fireproofing system. 

          Since coatings have a finite life, they may need to be renewed periodically to protect equipment and piping from CUI. 
          Inorganic zinc coatings without a topcoating are prone to rapid failure in the presence of moisture. For example, 
          calcium silicate insulated piping, when exposed to water, can generate an environment with a pH of 9 to 10 on the 
          wetted pipe surface. This environment may be detrimental to alkyd and inorganic zinc coatings and can lead to pitting 




        34                                      API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

        at the joints between the blocks of insulation. Inorganic zinc coatings used without a topcoat on structural steel being 
        fireproofed are generally not effective since zinc is amphoteric. This is because the alkaline conditions beneath 
        concrete and cementitious fireproofing can promote corrosion of the inorganic zinc coating. For carbon and low alloy 
       steels, TSA coating offers superior protection if well applied (see 11.5.4). For stainless steel, aluminium foil wrapping 
        is very effective in protecting the surface from ECSCC. NACE SP0198 provides guidance on the use of protective 
       coatings to mitigate corrosion under thermal insulation and fireproofing materials. 

        7  Inspection for CUI and CUF Damage
        7.1  General

        The purpose of the insulation on equipment and piping should be well understood before performing CUI inspections. 
        This can help establish priorities, determine what hazards may exist, determine if insulation can be removed while 
        equipment/lines are in operation, and determine if insulation can be permanently removed. In fact, one of the big 
        benefits from this insulation evaluation process is that it can actually discover many areas do not really require 
       insulation so permanent removal results in 100 % elimination of CUI risk. A management of change (MOC) process 
       should be used when considering modification or removal of any insulation or fireproofing.

        As part of an insulation removal evaluation, the following list of questions may be helpful to review prior to executing 
        CUI inspections.

        —   Is equipment/piping in cyclic service? If yes, what are the maximum temperatures expected and duration of 
           maximum temperature?

        —   Is equipment/piping in intermittent service? If yes, what is the frequency of operation?

        —   Is equipment/piping subject to steaming and/or hot gas treatment? If yes, what is the frequency, maximum 
            temperature, and the duration?

        —   Can the insulation be removed for CUI inspection and remediation while the equipment/piping is in service 
            without adversely affecting process control, product quality, and safety? 

        —   Is equipment/piping currently out-of-service?

        —   Is insulation installed for the sole purpose of personnel protection (>140 °F)? If yes, can metal cages or ceramic 
           coatings be used instead of insulation? 

        —   Does the equipment/piping contain fluids that may freeze resulting in an interruption of service(s)? 

        —   Does the equipment/piping need insulation for process control/unit production? If yes, would wind and rain 
            guards suffice? 

        —   Does the equipment/piping require heat tracing? If yes, is the heat tracing used continuously or only if certain 
            conditions exist?

        —   Does the equipment/piping require insulation to reduce condensation? 

        —   Does the equipment/piping require insulation for acoustics? 

        —   Does the equipment/piping require insulation for fire protection or controlling pressure relieving events?

        —   Do the heat conservation economics dictate this equipment/piping require insulation [usually considered at 
            >200 °F (>95 °C)]?



                                            CORROSION UNDER INSULATION AND FIREPROOFING                          35

          When assessing the possibility of permanently removing thermal insulation, it may be useful to review the flow chart 
          on the need for insulation presented in IMMM EFC 55.

          7.2  Inspection of Piping Operating Below 32 °F (0 °C)

          A common source of moisture on piping operating below 32 °F (0 °C) is water vapor penetrating the insulation system 
          where jacketing is damaged or jacket seams and vapor barrier mastics are compromised. Ice may form during 
          operation where water vapor penetrates. Insulated piping and equipment with a layer of ice do not corrode 
          significantly because of the low temperature and limited oxygen concentration. However, the ice-to-air interface 
          provides an ideal location for corrosion to occur as the result of freezing and thawing cycles that can occur as the 
          result of operating condition or periodic shutdowns. The ice-to-air interface (i.e. transition points) should be a focal 
          point of CUI inspections.

          In these services, the removal of insulation on operating equipment is undesirable because wet and icy conditions 
          make it difficult to inspect. It also exposes the insulation to atmospheric water vapor, trapping more moisture within 
          the insulation prior to reinsulation of the area. Even though insulation removal is possible with a well-thought-out and 
          well-executed plan to minimize the impact of ice formation, the primary inspection method to consider for these 
          transition points is profile radiography. Profile radiography can be conducted using film, a photostimulable phosphor 
          (PSP) plate, or a digital radiographic system without removing the piping from service. In addition, pulsed eddy 
          current examination method (PEC) can be utilized to assess relative damage in locations where the insulation is not 
          distorted because of ice formation. Any of the inspection methods discussed in 7.3 can be utilized when the piping 
          has been removed from service. 

          7.3  Inspection Tools and Methods

          7.3.1  General

          There are both direct and indirect inspection methods for detecting surface corrosion damage (i.e. CUI or CUF) on 
          equipment or structural supports. Direct inspection methods are inspection methods conducted without the presence 
          of a protective barrier (i.e. insulation or fireproofing system). Indirect inspection methods are inspection methods 
          conducted with the protective barrier (i.e. the insulation or fireproofing system) still in place. A discussion of all 
          inspection methods is presented below along with the advantages and disadvantages of each method.

          7.3.2  Direct Inspection Methods

          7.3.2.1 Visual Examination Method (VT) with Complete Removal of Insulation/Fireproofing

          The most reliable method to detect CUI and CUF on carbon and low alloy steel systems is to physically remove the 
          insulation or fireproofing and visually inspect the surface for damage. This approach is costly since insulation or 
          fireproofing on equipment or structural supports (i.e. I-beams, vessel skirts, etc.) has to be stripped and reinstalled. 
          Scaffolding costs to access insulated areas being inspected can be significant especially for large vessels or piping 
          systems on columns or towers. Scaffolding costs can be reduced in some situations utilizing rope access-qualified 
          inspectors. Inspection personnel need to be careful to avoid contact with surfaces at or above 140 °F (60 °C). 

          —   Advantages:

              —  only method that can detect 100 % of all surface corrosion damage.

          —   Disadvantages:

              —  expensive because costs have to be incurred for removing and reinstalling insulation/fireproofing on 
                  equipment or structural components (Note: additional costs are incurred if scaffolding is required to access 
                  insulated surfaces);

              —  special precautions are necessary on asbestos insulated systems;



        36                                      API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

            —  process problems may occur if the insulation is removed while the piping is in service;

            —  personnel may be exposed to hot surfaces.

        7.3.2.2 Liquid Penetrant Examination Method (PT)

        Typically, ECSCC on insulated stainless steel equipment is not normally detected until leakage occurs. When this 
        occurs, inspection of the area using PT is an effective way of determining the extent of damage (i.e. cracking) on 
        austenitic and duplex stainless steel. Damage is often associated with the weld heat affected zone. 

        Liquid penetrant examination is generally limited to surface temperatures below 120 °F (49 °C). After cleaning of the 
       surface being inspected, the penetrant is applied and allowed to reside on the surface for a period of time for capillary 
       action to draw the liquid into the crack. Excess penetrant is then removed from the surface and dried, and an 
        absorbent, light-colored powdered material (referred to as a developer) is applied over the inspection area. The 
        developer acts as a blotter, drawing any penetrant liquid present within cracks to the surface. As a result of the 
        penetrant being drawn out, visible discolored streaks are produced plainly delineating the cracks. The inspector then 
        can observe the indications against the background of the developing powder.

        Advantages and disadvantages of liquid penetrant inspection with partial insulation removal or at inspection ports are 
        as follows.

        —   Advantages:

            —  capable of detecting very small discontinuities;

            —  relatively inexpensive nonsophisticated equipment.

        —   Disadvantages:

            —  surfaces have to be clean and free of organic or inorganic contaminants that can impede the action of the 
               penetrating media;

            —  when sprayed, penetrants are easy to ignite when exposed to ignition sources;

            —  cold surfaces require longer dwell times to allow sufficient time for penetrant to be drawn into the crack.

        7.3.3 Indirect Inspection Methods

        7.3.3.1 General

        Indirect inspection methods can be classified as semiquantitative methods that attempt to estimate the relative 
       degree of surface corrosion damage present or as qualitative methods that attempt to look for the impact that surface 
        corrosion damage has on the insulation/fireproofed system. 

        7.3.3.2 Semiquantitative Methods

        7.3.3.2.1 General

        These are inspection methods that indirectly quantify the relative degree of surface corrosion that has occurred. 
        These methods are conducted without complete removal of the insulation or fireproofing from the equipment or 
        structural support and include ultrasonic, radiographic, eddy current, or thermal inspection methods. 

          7.3.3.2.2 Guided Wave Examination Method (GWT)

          GWT can be used to detect CUI on piping. This testing can be performed without the requirement of extensive insulation 
          removal. It can also provide inspection coverage over long distances under the right circumstances. GWT utilizes an 
          array of low-frequency ultrasonic transducers, attached to the pipe circumference of a pipe, to generate an axially 
          symmetric wave in both directions away from the transducer array. These transducer arrays can generate either 
          torsional, flexural, or longitudinal waves. Figure 6 shows examples of guided wave equipment and signal displays.

          The torsional wave mode is the transmission mode most commonly used. The equipment operates in a pulse-echo 
          configuration where the array of transducers is used for both the excitation and detection of the signals.


                       Figure 6—Guided Wave Transducer Arrays, Signal Representation, and Results

          GWT can be used as a screening method to identify potential areas of CUI damage. Testing can be performed 
          without widespread removal of the insulation system (i.e. jacketing and insulation).                      

          Factors that limit the effectiveness of GWT include excessive internal or external surface roughness, exterior 
          connections such as welded pipe supports, high viscosity liquids in the piping, and soil in direct contact with the 
          exterior of the piping system. Inspection coverage is also limited by the number of welds and elbows in the piping 
          system. Also, defects located in the immediate vicinity of welds are difficult to identify because of the strong ultrasonic 
          reflection from the weld itself and could be as much as 6 in. (150 mm) on either side of the weld. This method cannot 
          detect localized pits and typically requires corrosion damage be greater than 4 % to 10 % of the pipe cross section to 
          be detected. As a result, this method of inspection may not be applicable if CUI damage is not extensive.

          In addition to the limitations discussed above, it should be noted that interpretation of data is operator dependent. 
          Owner/users should review the experience of operators performing GWT on piping systems prior to conducting an 
          inspection. Some owner/users have required performance demonstration tests prior to initiating an extensive GWT 
          program. Advantages and disadvantages for guided wave testing are shown below.

          —   Advantages:

              —  can inspect up to 100 ft (30 m) in each direction away from the transducer array;



        38                                      API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

            —  only ~3 ft (1 m) of insulation need to be removed to attach transducer array;

            —  piping from 2 to 48 NPS can be tested.

        —   Disadvantages:

            —  limited to applications operating below 250 °F (125 °C); 

            —  piping containing high-viscosity liquids, heavy external coatings, buried piping, or piping with an excessive 
               number of welds/fittings can reduce the extent of inspection coverage;

            —  isolated pitting or corrosion in the immediate vicinity of welds may not be detected;

            —  technique is operator dependent.

        7.3.3.2.3 Radiographic Examination Methods

        There are a variety of techniques involving radiographic methods that can be used to detect CUI damage. 
        Radiography essentially requires a source of radiation opposite a detection medium that records the radiation either 
        as a film or digital image. These include profile radiography, film density radiography, flash radiography, radiometric 
        profiling, real-time radiography, computed radiography (CR), and digital radiography (DR). A discussion of each 
        method is presented below along with their advantages and disadvantages.

        a) Profile Radiography—Profile radiography is used to radiograph a small section of the pipe wall. A comparator ball 
           is used to assess the remaining wall thickness of the pipe (see Figure 7). The exposure source is usually iridium 
           192, with cobalt 60 being used for heavier wall piping. Alternately, profile radiography can also be done using X-
           ray sources. Profile radiography is an effective evaluation method but becomes technically challenging in piping 
           systems over 10 in. (25.4 cm) in diameter and only offers the limited luxury of verifying relatively small areas. 
           Profile radiographs can be taken using either a tangential or double-wall radiographic technique. 


                                   Figure 7—Schematic of Profile Radiography Setup

             This technique is not capable of detecting ECSCC on austenitic or duplex stainless steels. In addition, radiation 
             safety can be a real concern. The need to cordon off a large area for radiographic examination can result in 
             downtime and personnel scheduling conflicts. Profile radiography is usually preferred to assess insulated piping 
             for uniform corrosion damage. Figure 8 shows a profile radiograph image made using a digital imaging plate.   


                      Figure 8—Profile Radiograph of CUI Damage on an Insulated Small Diameter Pipe

             When pitting damage is perpendicular to the axis of the radiographic beam, the pit depth measurement can be 
             measured directly off the radiograph [see Figure 9 a)]. When the pitting is located at some angle to the axis of the 
             radiographic beam, the projected pit depth (h) needs to be corrected for the geometry [see Figure 9 b)]. Guidelines 
             on the application limits for profile radiography are shown in Figure 10. 

             The advantages and disadvantages of profile radiography are as follows.

              — Advantages:

                 —  exposes a small section of pipe to tangential radiation and compares the image dimensions with that of a 
                      comparator of known size, which gives the wall thickness;

                 —  used routinely on piping 2 NPS and above;

                 —  determines wall thickness with an accuracy smaller than ±0.040 in. (±1 mm).

              — Disadvantages:

                 —  limitations on pipe size that can be inspected.

          b) Film Density Radiography—Profile radiography and film density radiography are complementary methods. Film 
             density radiography is preferred to assess pitting corrosion damage on insulated piping because of the difficulty of 
             aligning pits perpendicular to the radiographic beam in profile radiography. Film density radiography only 
             measures the average wall thickness (AWT) of the piping and is often used on small diameter piping [i.e. ≤6 in. 
             (150 mm)]; however, with some trade-offs, this technique can be used on larger diameter piping. 


             The appropriate energy and film speed should be chosen when the film density measurement technique is utilized 
             to achieve good image quality. It is important to locate the pit or local corrosion area correctly. The pitting should lie 
             on film side during exposure to prevent an underestimation of its depth. The depth of the pitting and remaining wall 
             thickness can be determined using the measured density of the pit and sound wall and a density/thickness 
             reference curve [Figure 9 c)]. The density/thickness reference curve should be developed using step wedges that 
             are made from material that is radiographically similar to the piping being evaluated. The step wedge thickness 
             should be twice the thickness of the pipe wall being evaluated. Advantages and disadvantages of film density 
             radiography are as follows.

              — Advantages:

                 —  technique can locate irregular or scattered pits;

                 —  provides a permanent record of examined areas;

                 —  provides a relatively easy scanning method without the need for insulation removal.

              — Disadvantages:

                 —  corrosion products within pits can decrease film density and result in an incorrect determination of the 
                      wall thickness;

                 —  liquids present in the equipment (piping) will reduce the transmitted radiation;

                 —  an ultrasonic examination will also be required if density curves are not calculated;

                 —  piping or equipment would require insulation to protect the film at elevated temperatures.

             Film density radiography can also be done using either CR or DR.

          c) Flash Radiography—Flash radiography is an alternative to conventional gamma radiography. It is normally 
             applied to pipes up to 12 in. outside diameter (OD) to detect corrosion on pipe ODs under insulation. It can be 
             applied to items with diameters up to 36 in. (1 m) given sufficient source to film distance and radiation output. This 
             technique utilizes a field portable X-ray tube rather than a radioactive source. 

             The devices are capable of producing through wall images for insulated piping up to 2 in. (50 mm) in diameter and 
             for pipes up to 12 in. (300 mm) in diameter to detect corrosion on the OD of insulated piping. The technique uses 
             X-ray equipment with a low radiation exposure time, fast X-ray films and intensifying screens, or digital detection 
             media. The beam is arranged tangentially to the pipe wall and corrosion of the external wall shows up as a 
             variation in the profile of the pipe. It saves costs normally attributed to the removal and reinstatement of insulation.

             Flash radiography can also identify where insulation has become waterlogged. Image contrast, image resolution, 
             and the penetrating ability of flash radiography are not as good as that for conventional radiography because of 
             the limited radiation available, the large grain film, and the relatively large focal spot of the sources. Despite this, 
             the image quality is sufficient to detect significant metal loss on the OD of insulated pipe.

             Figure 11 shows an example of a flash radiography system for pipe profiling to detect wall thinning due to 
             corrosion. Advantages and disadvantages of flash radiography are as follows.

              — Advantages:

                 —  no need to rope off an exclusion area because of the low radiation available;

                  —  can identify water-logged insulation.



        42                                      API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583


        Figure 11—Photo of a Flash Radiography System for Pipe Profiling to Detect Wall Thinning Due to Corrosion

            — Disadvantages:

               —  inspection generally limited to pipe diameters up to 12 NPS;
               —  image contrast and resolution not as good as conventional radiography because of the limited radiation 
                   available, the use of large grain film, and the relatively large focal spot of the devices.

        d) Radiometric Profiling—These handheld radiographic systems use a gadolinium 153 radioactive source in 
           combination with a solid state scintillator that converts X-rays into photons (see Figure 12). The activity of the 
           source and the length of the C-arm used determine the maximum density that the equipment can penetrate when 
           looking for CUI. This equipment can allow estimation of the pipe wall thickness when shot through the center of 
           the pipe. The limitations with regard to pipe and insulation diameter depends on the product inside the pipe, the 
           density of the pipe material (thickness), the type of insulation, and the type of insulation jacketing being 
           penetrated. In general, this equipment is capable of inspecting insulated standard wall thickness pipe with an 
           overall OD of up to 24 in.

           Advantages and disadvantages of radiometric profiling are as follows.

            — Advantages:

               —  suitable for piping from 1/2 to 24 NPS;

               —  no radiation barricade is required to utilize device;

               —  very portable and may be operated by a single technician.

            — Disadvantages:

               —  measures the remaining combined double-wall thickness, not the pipe wall thickness of the corroded 
                   area;

               —  cannot differentiate between ID and OD corrosion;

               —  requires a radioactive materials license.

        e) Real-time Radiographic Examination Method (RTR)—RTR, commonly referred to as fluoroscopy, provides a clear 
           view of the pipe’s OD through the insulation, producing a silhouette of the OD of the pipe on a TV-type monitor that 
           is viewed during the inspection [see Figure 13 a)]. No film is used or developed. The real-time device has a 
           radiation source and image intensifier/detector that are connected to a C-arm [Figure 13 b)]. There are two 
           categories of real-time radiography devices, one using an X-ray source and one using a gadolinium radioactive 
           isotope (i.e. Ga-153) source. Each has its own advantages and disadvantages; however, the X-ray systems 
           deliver far better resolution than the isotope systems.

             The X-ray digital fluoroscopy equipment operates using a low-level radiation source (≤75 KV). The equipment 
             allows the voltage and/or amperage to be adjusted to obtain the clearest image and allows for safe operation 
             without disruption in operating units or even confined spaces. As a result of the low-level radiation, the radiation 
             does not penetrate the pipe wall. Instead, the radiation penetrates the insulation, and images the profile of the 
             outer wall of the pipe. In order for CUI to be detected on insulated pipe, it may be necessary to rotate the 
             fluoroscopy device 360° around a pipe. In many instances, the image may indicate a rough surface of the OD of 
             the pipe indicative of corrosion; however, other means should be employed to determine the extent or degree of 
             corrosion present. 

             Since the radiation is generated electrically, the instrument is perfectly safe when the power is off. Equipment 
             utilizing radioactive material requires additional precautions to ensure the source is shielded when not being used. 
             These precautions extend to transportation and storage of radioactive material in accordance with NRC or state 
             mandated regulations.

             Most of the fluoroscopy systems come with a heads-up video display. A helmet-mounted, visor-type video display 
             frees the system operator’s hands to maneuver the C-arm while keeping the image before the operator at all 
             times. The heads-up display also improves interpretation by shielding the screen from the sun. The video images 
             can be printed on site using a video printer or recorded for evaluation at a later date. 


                          a) Representation of CUI (left) and a Silhouette Display of CUI (right)


                                      b) Photo of a Real-time Radiography System

                                          Figure 13—RTR Display and System

           Advantages and disadvantages for real-time radiography are shown below.

            — Advantages:

               —  images are easily viewed because they are digital and can be electronically stored and retrieved using a 
                   computer;

               —  there is no maximum size limitation since multiple arrays can be assembled to view large areas.

           — Disadvantages:
               —  adequate clearance [i.e. up to 12 in. (30 cm)] required on piping in congested areas;

               —  wet insulation hampers testing;

               —  radioisotope system image quality deteriorates as isotope decays.

        f) Computed and Digital Radiography—Film radiography is the dominant, volumetric nondestructive testing 
           technique used throughout the world. The primary advantages of film radiography are that film is lightweight, 
           flexible, and used in a variety of applications for many years with a proven track record. Despite this, film does 



                                            CORROSION UNDER INSULATION AND FIREPROOFING                          45

             have disadvantages. Namely, film processing requires significant amounts of time to develop radiographs 
             (~20 minutes), specialized facilities for film processing (i.e. a dark room), and generates hazardous wastes that 
             require disposal (namely, silver thiosulfate). Film radiographs have a limited shelf life, and require a temperature- 
             and humidity-controlled storage environment. By contrast, DR requires none of the above. Digital images can be 
             generated, optimized, analyzed, stored, and distributed in electronic format.

             1) Computed Radiography (CR)—CR is a transitional technology between film and direct DR. A reusable, flexible, 
               PSP plate is loaded into a cassette and is exposed in a manner similar to traditional film radiography. The 
               cassette is then placed in a laser reader where it is scanned and translated into a digital image. Depending on 
               the resolution required and image size, the process of digitizing may take from one to five minutes. Once 
               digitally captured, the image may be stored on a computer or other electronic media. Archiving is made easier 
               and the images can be electronically distributed to others for viewing. Advantages and disadvantages for CR 
               are shown below.

              — Advantages:

                 —  no silver based film or chemicals are required to process film;

                 —  reduced film storage costs because images can be stored digitally;

                 —  requires fewer retakes due to underexposure or overexposure.

              — Disadvantages:

                 —  imaging plates can be damaged by rough handling.

             2) Digital Radiography (DR)—A direct DR system is different from CR in that it digitizes the photon radiation that 
               passes through an object directly into an image that can be displayed on a computer monitor. There are three 
               technologies used in direct digital imaging systems:

              — amorphous silicon devices, 

              —  charge coupled devices, and 

              —  complementary metal oxide semiconductor devices.

               Direct digital system images are available for viewing and analysis in seconds as compared to the minutes 
               required in CR systems. The increased processing speed is a result of the unique construction of the pixels in a 
               direct digital system, an arrangement that also allows an image resolution that is superior to CR and most film 
               applications.

               Advantages and disadvantages for DR are shown below.

              — Advantages:

                 —  requires less radiation to produce an image compared to film radiography;

                 —  the image may be stored, emailed, or processed on a computer;

                 —  automated defect recognition systems can be used to analyze the image, replacing the subjective 
                      assessment of an inspector.

        46                                      API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

            — Disadvantages:

               —  DR panel detectors require care to avoid damage;

               —  lifetime of DR panel detectors dependent on duty cycle/doses applied;

               —  as a result of manufacturing, every DR panel has some dead pixels.

        7.3.3.2.4 Pulsed Eddy Current Method (PEC)

        PEC has been used in recent years to detect areas of wall thinning on insulated piping through aluminum or stainless 
       steel jacketing. It is also used to inspect fireproofed legs on storage spheres. It is a noncontact, electromagnetic 
       examination method used to detect the average wall loss of carbon and low alloy steel materials. A photo of a pulsed 
       eddy current system is shown in Figure 14. 


                               Figure  14—A Pulsed Eddy Current Instrument with Probe

       A magnetic field, created by an electrical current in the probe coil, penetrates the jacketing and magnetizes the pipe 
        wall. Current, in the probe coil, is then switched off to cause a sudden drop in the magnetic field. As a result of the 
        change in the magnetic field, eddy currents are generated in the pipe wall. These eddy currents diffuse inward and 
        decrease in strength. This decrease in the strength of the generated eddy currents is monitored by the probe coil. The 
        thickness of the component is related to the length of time it takes for the eddy currents to show a change of the 
        decay rate when eddy currents reach the back wall of the metal. The greater the wall thickness of the component, the 
        longer it takes for the eddy currents to reach the backwall. Figure 15 and Figure 16 show a representation of the 
        pulsed eddy current technique and a pulsed eddy current display. 

       The area where the measurement is taken is referred to as the “footprint.” The probe is designed in such a way that 
       the magnetic field focuses on an area on the surface of the component. The thickness measured by the technique is 
       the AWT over the footprint area. The size of the area is dependent on the insulation, component thickness, and probe 
       design. In general, the footprint can be considered to be on the order of the insulation thickness. Since the technique 
       measures the average rather than the minimum thickness component thickness, the technique is not suitable to 
       detect pitting that can be highly localized. This effect is shown in Figure 17. 


                            Figure 15—Principle of Operation the Pulsed Eddy Current Technique


            Figure 16—A PEC Display Showing AWT Reading (top left), Logged Inspection Grid (bottom left), and the 
                                          Decay of the Eddy Currents (bottom right)


                  Figure 17—Difference Between Average and Minimum Wall Thickness Within the Footprint



        48                                      API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

            PEC can be used on carbon and low alloy steel equipment and piping through up to 8 in. (200 mm) of insulation 
             and jacketing. The advantages and disadvantages for pulsed eddy current inspection are shown below.

            — Advantages:

               —  noninvasive, noncontact method that does not require surface preparation;

               —  can be used between –150 °F and 930 °F (–100 °C and 550 °C).

            — Disadvantages:

               —  averages corrosion over a 4 in. (100 mm) diameter area so that isolated pitting may be difficult to detect;

               —  affected by ferromagnetic appurtenances such as insulation rings, vents, and drains that can obscure 
                   surface damage;
               —  technique is operator dependent;

               —  cannot be used on insulated systems with galvanized or aluminized steel jacketing.

        7.3.3.3 Qualitative Methods

        7.3.3.3.1 General

        These are inspection methods that attempt to assess the quality of the insulation/fireproofing system as an indirect 
        measure of the potential for surface corrosion damage. These methods are conducted without removing the 
        insulation or fireproofing from the equipment or structural support and include the visual inspection with partial 
        removal of the insulation, the neutron backscatter, and thermal/infrared inspection methods. 

        7.3.3.3.2 Visual Examination Method (VT) with Partial Removal of Insulation

        The most reliable technique to detect CUI is to physically remove the insulation and visually inspect the surface of the 
        vessel or piping. This approach is costly since equipment must be deinsulated and reinsulated and frequently 
        requires scaffolding to access areas for inspection. Removing smaller sections of insulation (i.e. windows) is useful for 
        advanced inspections to help prioritize equipment for remediation or more thorough follow-up inspections. 

        The placement and size of these inspection windows (i.e. holes cut in the insulation to expose the equipment external 
       surface for inspection) is very important. Windows should be cut where CUI is most likely such as at poorly sealed 
       insulation penetrations, at low points in the piping system where water can collect, at insulation support rings or 
       vessel stiffening rings, or at areas where the insulation jacketing is in poor condition and water can penetrate the 
       insulation system. The areas where insulation is removed should be large enough to be representative of the 
       condition of the equipment. It may be necessary to cut several windows in suspect locations because of the difficulty 
       in predicting where CUI damage has occurred. 

        For example, on a large drum or tower it may be necessary to remove a vertical strip of insulation to represent 
        different temperature zones in the equipment and to locate stiffener or insulation support rings. Once located, specific 
        insulation support rings or stiffeners may then be selected for insulation removal around the circumference of the 
        vessel to locate areas where degradation may be the most severe. 

        A variant of partial insulation removal is to perform visual examination at inspection ports in the insulation. This 
        approach is of minimal value because of the limited amount of surface area exposed for inspection. 

        Advantages and disadvantages of visual inspection with partial insulation removal or at inspection ports are as 
        follows.

        —   Advantages:



                                            CORROSION UNDER INSULATION AND FIREPROOFING                          49

              —  costs associated with insulation removal/reinstallation are significantly reduced compared to complete 
                  removal of insulation;

              —  limited exposure to hot surfaces for personnel.

          —   Disadvantages:

              —  CUI damage can be missed since only a limited area of the equipment is inspected;

              —  special precautions are necessary on asbestos insulated systems;

              —  windows cut in insulation pose a potential leak path for water ingress if insulation not effectively repaired/
                  sealed.

          7.3.3.3.3 Neutron Backscatter Examination Method

          The neutron backscatter technique works because of the interaction of neutrons with hydrogen atoms. The technique 
          utilizes an americium 241 radioactive source to emit fast neutrons with high energies through the insulation jacketing. 
          When these fast neutrons interact with hydrogen atoms, they release energy and are transformed into slow or thermal 
          neutrons. The thermal neutrons are scattered in all directions, but have a short travel path. Some of these thermal 
          neutrons are scattered back toward the scanning head and counted by a sensitive detector. The more hydrogen 
          atoms present in a material, the more thermal neutrons produced and counted by the detector. Figure 18 shows a 
          photo of a neutron backscatter system.

          It should be noted that this technique detects hydrogen atoms. Therefore, these devices cannot distinguish between 
          water, hydrocarbons, acids, bases, and organic liquids. However, the presence of any of these fluids would warrant 
          follow-up inspection.

          Advantages and disadvantages for the neutron backscatter inspection method are as follows.

          —   Advantages:

              —  detects the presence of water or hydrocarbon under insulation jacketing;

              —  easy-to-use method that can be used to rapidly scan insulated surfaces.

          —   Disadvantages:

              —  detects the presence of water or hydrocarbon in the insulation system, not corrosion;

              —  technique is only effective while insulation is wet; technique is not effective if sufficient time has elapsed for 
                  insulation to dry out.

          7.3.3.3.4 Thermal/Infrared Imaging Examination Method

          The thermal/infrared imaging examination method (i.e. thermography) is another approach for assessing the potential 
          for CUI on insulated vessels and piping. Thermography is a rapid, passive inspection technique that produces a heat 
          picture of the surface of a component using a thermal imaging infrared (IR) camera. IR cameras are used to detect 
          damp spots in the insulation due to a temperature difference between the dry and the wet insulation. 

          IR cameras can detect surface temperature variations on the component as small as 0.18 °F (0.10 °C), though there 
          must be a temperature differential across the thickness of the component of at least 18 °F (10 °C). Temperature 
          variations on the component are displayed as different colors. Depending on the temperature of the product 
          contained, “hot” or “cold” spots on the thermograph show up because of the effect of moisture increasing local thermal 

                                  Figure  18—A Photo of a Neutron Backscatter System

        conductivity in the component. Thermography is often carried out from as far away as 65 ft (20 m). Full inspection 
        coverage can at times be difficult because of site obstructions such as existing piping or equipment during IR photo 
        shooting. Figure 19 shows examples of IR thermographs.

        In some instances, IR surveys are conducted in conjunction with neutron backscatter examination. Conducting the IR 
       survey two to three hours after the sun has set is advantageous since wet insulation holds the heat absorbed from 
       solar rays longer than dry insulation. This can tend to promote more contrast in the thermograph. In general, 
       thermographic inspection for CUI should be done in the absence of strong gusty winds (i.e. nonwindy conditions) 
       since wet insulation maintains its heat longer. It should be noted that while water may be detected with this technique, 
       it does not necessarily mean that CUI is occurring.

       Advantages and disadvantages for thermal/infrared inspection are as follows.

        —   Advantages:

            —  rapid method to detect damaged or wet insulation;

            —  noninvasive, noncontact method that does not require direct access to the insulated surface (i.e. can be 
               done from ground level without scaffolding);

           —  easy-to-use method to highlight areas requiring inspection follow-up.

        —   Disadvantages:

            —  does not detect corrosion but only areas where insulation may have been compromised (i.e. damaged or 
               wet insulation);

           —  not effective method if insulation has had sufficient time to dry out.
          8   Risk-Based Inspection (RBI)
          8.1  General

          8.1.1  With regard to CUI/CUF, the purpose of RBI is to identify susceptible pressure vessels, piping, and fireproofed 
          structural supports subject to CUI/CUF, to prioritize inspections, and to develop an inspection plan to manage risk. 
          Specific guidance on the RBI process and procedures for CUI is provided in API 580, API 581, API 510, API 653, and 
          API 570. A similar RBI process and procedure can be adopted for CUF assessment. An RBI assessment may be 
          used to increase or decrease the inspection frequency and scope of CUI/CUF inspections when compared to time-
          based or condition-based inspection planning.

          The information needed to assess the likelihood of failure due to CUI or CUF damage includes but is not limited to:

          —   specific site environment;

          —   material of construction;

          —   age of component;

          —   operating process temperature;

          —   exposure to intermittent/cyclic service;

        —   prior inspection histories/results;

        —   areas with missing insulation;

        —   type of insulation/fireproofing;

        —   age of insulation/fireproofing;

        —   type of coating present, if any;

        —   age of coating;

        —   presence and condition of steam tracing.

        These data can be obtained from a variety of sources and can include the original engineering records, MOC databases, 
        maintenance work order records, and inspection records. Other data that pertain to the physical condition of the 
        component can be obtained from a field inspection. These inspections can be incorporated into the planned API 510, 
        API 570, and API 653 external inspection programs or may be part of a special emphasis CUI inspection project. 

        8.1.2 Prior to conducting the assessment, the atmospheric environment of the area being assessed within the plant 
       needs to be classified. Examples of atmospheric environment descriptors included in API 581 are arid/dry area, 
        temperate area, severe area, arid marine/cooling tower drift area.

        8.1.3 Though some users assess likelihood of failure for CUI and CUF using a quantitative assessment approach 
       described in API 581, many users choose to perform a qualitative assessment approach to assess the likelihood of 
       failure. Annex A shows an example of a points-based qualitative system for likelihood assessment that an owner/user 
       could choose to utilize. 

        When conducting a qualitative assessment, the owner/user may choose to modify (i.e. add or eliminate) the number 
        of parameters, change the description of individual parameter categories, modify the value of individual parameter 
        ratings, or increase or decrease the minimum or maximum range of individual parameters or the total number of 
        likelihood rating categories to address company or site-specific factors. 

        8.1.4 The owner/user should consider the differences between potential failure modes for each of the damage 
        mechanisms when assessing consequence, namely

        —   corrosion hole from CUI (most frequently a small leak),

        —   cracking for ECSCC of austenitic/duplex stainless steels (most frequently a small leak),

        —   rupture/structural instability (rarer event).

       While many CUI leaks occur from smaller pits, some CUI loss of integrity events have occurred as a result of larger 
        locally thinned areas. The owner/user should assess the consequence of both types of risks in the risk assessment 
        process.

        8.1.5 Consequence assessment should conform to the documented site consequence assessment process. 
       Guidance on RBI consequence assessment can be found in API 580 and API 581. Though CUI damage is most often 
       likely to produce an equipment reliability issue, in some cases, safety and environmental issues can arise.

        9  Design Practices to Minimize CUI
        9.1  General

        Thedesign of hot and cold service insulation systems has to address certain specific requirements. Three of these 
        requirements are common to both services and relate to coating of the substrate metal, selection of the insulation 


          material and weatherproofing. A further requirement is the necessity for a vapor barrier in cold service. Each of these 
          requirements is discussed in some detail below.

          9.2  Coatings for Hot and Cold Services

          9.2.1  The coating system provides protection from corrosion when water penetrates the insulation system. The 
          coating system needs to be capable of operation under intermittent immersion service. Intermittent service is defined in 
          many specifications from major petroleum and petrochemical companies as 15 % of time spent in the temperature 
          range of risk. Equipment that operates or stands at ambient temperature for more than 15 % of its expected life should 
          also be coated.

          9.2.2  Carbon steel should be coated with one of the following coating types: epoxy amine, epoxy polyamide, or zinc 
          phosphate phenolic, all of which may be used up to the maximum temperature limits recommended by the 
          manufacturer of the particular product. It should be emphasized that the coating manufacturer's application 
          instructions be strictly followed to optimize coating performance. This includes such conditions as relative humidity/
          temperature limitations, standards of surface preparation, and the length of time between priming and topcoating to 
          prevent intercoat adhesion difficulties. Within the past several years, numerous owner/users have specified the 
          application of TSA to reduce the potential for corrosion in applications prone to CUI damage. As with any applied 
          coating, surface preparation and application concerns need to be addressed to maximize the service life of the coating 
          (see 11.5).

          9.2.3  If special protection is required, the surface should be degreased and then coated. Water glass (sodium 
          silicate) is used to coat the surface when inhibited calcium silicate is the specified insulation material. A silicone-acrylic 
          coating (guaranteed free from low melting point metals, e.g. zinc) is used when foam glass, mineral wool, etc., are the 
          specified insulations. For stainless steel equipment, some operators specify wrapping the equipment with aluminum 
          foil prior to insulating for additional protection by acting as both a physical and a galvanic barrier to preventing ECSCC.

          9.3   Insulation Materials

          9.3.1  General

          As stated previously for both hot and cold service the nonwicking, nonabsorbent type of insulation is the first choice 
          within the material’s limits. Mineral wool, fiberglass, and calcium silicate have the highest tendency to absorb water and 
          chlorides and therefore a higher susceptibility to CUI damage. Materials with a closed-cell structure like expanded perlite 
          and cellular glass tend have a higher resistance to absorbing water. Contact-free insulation systems prevent 
          accumulation of water and chloride buildup on the steel surface, thereby reducing the probability of CUI damage. 

          Common insulation systems for hot and cold services are outlined below. The lists shown below are not meant to 
          indicate that these are the only materials that can be used in the services and temperature ranges. Owner /users may 
          wish to review the advantages and disadvantages of insulation materials listed in Section 6 prior to selecting an 
          insulation material for various applications. Alternately, owner/users may prefer to consult a subject matter expert to 
          develop guidelines on the applicable insulation materials for specific service. 

          9.3.2  Ferritic Steel in Hot Service

          Examples of insulation materials used on ferritic piping or equipment in hot service are shown below:

          —   Up to 200 °F (93 °C)—Cellular glass, expanded perlite, silica aerogel, mineral wool, fiberglass, or polyurethane 
              foam.

          —   Over 200 °F (93 °C)—Cellular glass, expanded perlite, silica aerogel, mineral wool, or fiberglass up to their limits.

          —   Over 250 °F (120 °C)—Cellular glass, silica aerogel, mineral wool, fiberglass, or calcium silicate blocks up to their 
              limits.


        9.3.3 Ferritic Steel in Cold Service

        Examples of insulation materials used on ferritic piping or equipment in cold service are shown below:

        —   –76 °F (–60 °C) to 800 °F (430 °C)—Cellular glass.

        —   –76 °F (–60 °C) to 200 °F (93 °C)—Polyurethane foam.

        9.3.4 Austenitic/Duplex Stainless Steel in Hot Service

        Examples of insulation materials used on austenitic or duplex stainless steel piping or equipment in hot service are 
        shown below:

        —   Up to 400 °F (204 °C)—Cellular glass, expanded perlite, mineral wool, fiberglass.

        —   Over 400 °F (204 °C)—Mineral wool, expanded perlite, fiberglass, or inhibited calcium silicate.

        9.3.5 Austenitic/Duplex Stainless Steel in Cold Service

        Examples of insulation materials used on austenitic or duplex stainless steel piping or equipment in cold service are 
        shown below:

        —   –436 °F (–260 °C) to 800 °F (430 °C)—Cellular glass.

        —   –260 °F (–196 °C) to 200 °F (93 °C)—Polyurethane foam.

        9.3.6 Vapor Barrier

        A vapor barrier is required for cold service applications. This barrier should be continuous and is usually provided 
        by a glass fiber reinforced mesh impregnated with three coats of an elastomeric material. This elastomeric material 
        should be compatible with the insulation material and flexible at the lowest expected ambient temperature. If it is to be 
        left uncovered (i.e. unprotected by metallic weather proofing), the vapor barrier should be resistant to solar radiation.

        9.4  Jacketing

        9.4.1 General

        Jacketing or weatherproofing is the final element of the system. In the form of a metallic covering, it should be 
        considered mandatory for hot service but need only be used for cold service where the vapor barrier can be abused 
        (mechanically damaged). Metallic jackets are manufactured from solid aluminum, zinc- or aluminum-coated sheet 
        steel, or from stainless steel sheet metal. Jackets should be designed so that all joints are in the watershed position. 
        Adequate overlaps should be employed coupled with the use of elastomeric sealants to prevent ingress of water either 
        by gravity, by capillary action, or by wind drift.

        9.4.2 Nozzles and Attachments

        The areas of concern on an insulated, vertical vessel are illustrated in Figure 20. As indicated, the top head 
        especially where nozzles, lifting lugs, etc. project through the insulation can be at greatest risk from CUI. Similarly the 
        vertical walls are at risk at positions where horizontal attachments (support brackets, stiffener and/insulation rings, 
       nozzles) pierce the insulation. Such attachments can provide paths for water to short circuit the weatherproofing/ 
       insulation and contact the walls. 



                                   Figure  20—Areas of Concern for CUI in a Vertical Vessel

          9.4.3  Appurtenances

          Vessels, exchangers, tanks, and piping include a number of appurtenances that are required for support, 
          reinforcement, and connection to other items. Details such as gussets, brackets, reinforcing pads, saddles, 
          support shoes, vacuum rings, etc. fall into this category. These appurtenances make weatherproofing difficult as 
          they provide preferential channels for the entry of water into the insulation. Needlessly complicated support details are 
          difficult to insulate correctly, and insulation workers often seal these areas poorly unless closely supervised during 
          insulation installation.

        9.4.4 Insulation Laps and Folds

        Jacketing should be installed in such a way as to eliminate water ingress. This includes sealing any breaks or 
        penetrations in the sheeting using a silicone caulking material and locating the jacketing folds and overlaps in such a 
        way that moisture cannot be trapped by the jacketing. Namely, folds in the jacketing on horizontal piping need to be 
        located between the 4 o’clock and 8 o’clock position. On vertical piping, folds in the jacketing need to be located on 
        the side away from the prevailing winds. Of course, jacketing joints need to be installed so that water tends to run off, 
        rather than underneath, the joint. 

        9.4.5 Corrosion of Jacketing

        Sometimes metal jackets suffer from underside corrosion in hot service. This is due to water trapped in the insulation 
        during the insulation operations becoming vaporized. The vapor is driven to the jacket where it condenses to form 
       alkaline or acidic solutions, depending on the insulation type. The cycle repeats and the corrosivity of the condensate 
       increases and results in the corrosion of the aluminum or steel jacket. Metal jackets should contain moisture 
       barriers on the inside. Where corrosion of the jacket has traditionally been a problem, plastic or all-weather types 
        may provide a solution.

        9.4.6 Techniques to Minimize Water Ingress

        9.4.6.1 General

        Examples of insulation techniques that can be adopted to minimize the possibility of water ingress at such 
       attachments are shown for vessels and piping components in Annex B. In essence, all the techniques are based on 
       preventing water breaching the external weatherproof covering. This primary objective is then further reinforced by 
       the provision of secondary measures. These measures, which include the use of vapor barriers or multilayer 
       insulation with staggered joints, are important if the external weatherproof is breached. If corrosion is to be prevented, 
       attention should be given to the design and the installation of the insulation system and to the provision of suitable 
       barriers to water ingress. These barriers should eliminate crevices that permit the concentration of moisture and 
       chlorides. To this end, welded external attachments should be minimized. If these are unavoidable, welds should be 
       continuous and the entire equipment should be protected with suitable barrier coatings. The primary safeguard 
       against CUI is a continuous weatherproof barrier. Special attention should be paid to the application of insulation, in 
       particular to the weatherproofing, around projections such as nozzles and clips because these offer ready paths for 
       water to enter and migrate to the surfaces of the underlying metal.

        9.4.6.2 Drain Holes in Jacketing

        Small [e.g. 1/4 in. (6 mm)] diameter drain holes can be drilled in rigid insulation on insulated hot piping to allow any 
       water accumulating in the insulation to escape. Drain holes should be located at the bottom of vertical piping runs and 
       along the bottom of horizontal piping. Water detectors can be installed at those positions to indicate the presence 
       (drainage) of water and the opportunity to analyze the collected water for corrosion product content (i.e. indication of 
       coating breakdown).

        9.5  General Design Aspects 

        9.5.1 General

        One of the prime objectives of the general design of equipment and piping that is insulated should be to minimize CUI. 

        9.5.2 Design Simplification

        As a general rule of thumb, complicated designs are difficult to insulate and should be avoided. Figure 21 is an 
       example of a design layout that is difficult to insulate and weatherproof and therefore had from the outset a high 
       potential for CUI.


          9.5.3  Pressure Vessels

          For the purposes of this document, “pressure vessels” include all major types of static equipment (e.g. columns, heat 
          exchangers, etc.). Design considerations for pressure vessels include the following.

          a) The design and orientation of any protrusions should be configured to aid effective water shedding.

          b) If possible, seal-welded sealing discs should be installed on vessel nozzles and other protrusions through the 
             insulation. Seal-welded plates are useful in diverting water away from critical locations. These can be used, for 
             example, on nozzles for vessel shells and tank roofs to divert water away from the protrusion through the 
             jacketing. However, this requires attention to design detail, particularly for horizontal protrusions. An example of 
             sealing discs on vessel nozzles is given in Figure A.6.

          c) To aid insulation fit-up and the achievement of a water tight seal, attachments supporting ancillary items such as 
             ladders, gantries, etc. on insulated vessels should be of a sufficient length such that they protrude beyond the 
             insulation thickness by at least 100 mm (4 in.) when measured perpendicular to the surface of the insulation.

          d) Nozzles and manways should be at least 76 mm (3 in.) longer than the insulation thickness to allow for the 
             insulation and jacketing to be terminated and sealed independently of the nozzle flange insulation and to give 
             proper clearance for flange bolt withdrawal without damaging the nozzle insulation.

          e) Bucket-type insulation support rings (as described in NACE SP0198), which could act as a moisture trap, should 
             be avoided.

          f) If installed bucket-type insulation support rings should be drilled to allow water to escape (note that maintaining 
             rust-free drain holes is a long-term maintenance issue).

          g) If practicable, insulation support rings should be attached to brackets that are seal welded to the vessel shell in 
             such a way that there is a gap between the support and the shell. An example of such a support is given in 
             Figure A.7.
          h) Nameplates.

             1) Nameplates on insulated vessels should be fully incorporated in the insulation.

             2) Duplicate nameplates should be prepared and attached to the pressure vessel. Duplicate nameplates should 
               exactly reproduce the layout and information content of the original. The location and method of attachment of 
               the duplicate to the outside of the insulation may vary depending on the vessel layout.

        9.5.4 Piping

        9.5.4.1 General

        Design considerations for piping include the following.

        a) Supports for insulated piping should, if possible, make use of load-bearing insulation/jacketing to allow the pipe to 
           be supported without the need to penetrate the insulation. If load-bearing insulation/jacketing cannot be used, the 
           minimum length of the support should be four times the insulation thickness. Pipe supports are difficult to seal, and 
           the above modification enables the insulation jacketing to be continuous beneath the support clamp.

        b) Water hoods should be fitted to vertical overhead pipe supports to direct water away from potential entry points 
           where the support penetrates the insulation.

        c) Separation distances for insulated piping should be 1.5 times the sum of the insulation thicknesses to be applied to 
           the pipes. For example, the minimum pipe to pipe separation of two lines the first with 4 in. (100 mm) of insulation 
           and the second with 1.2 in. (30 mm) should be (4 in. + 1.2 in.) × 1.5 = 7.8 in. or (100 mm + 30 mm) × 1.5 = 195 mm.

        d) Separation distance between insulated piping and from structural steelwork should be two times the insulation 
           thickness.

        e) If possible, dead-legs in insulated piping should be avoided. Piping dead-legs can be particularly prone to CUI. 
           Heat leaking into dead-legs in cold piping or heat loss leading to cooling of dead-legs in hot piping can bring the 
           effective operating temperature at the dead-leg into a range in which the risk of CUI is much higher. 
           Considerations should be given to whether or not insulating dead-legs could cause internal corrosion such as dew 
           point corrosion.

        f) Heat tracing.

          1) If insulated piping is steam traced, joints in steam-tracing pipework should be located outside the insulation 
             jacketing. Steam-tracing pipework should enter and leave the insulation at the lowest possible point. Steam 
             leaks often occur at joints in the tracing pipework. If the joints are inside the insulation, leaking steam can rapidly 
             saturate the insulation and promote very rapid corrosion.

          2) Electric heat tracing should be permanently fixed to the pipe independent of the insulation material.

          3) Penetrations of electric heat tracing tape through the jacketing should be fitted with appropriate cable grommets 
            or glands to prevent moisture ingress. The penetrations should be positioned away from the prevailing weather 
            and between the 4 o’clock and 8 o’clock positions on horizontal pipe.

        9.5.4.2 Valves and Instruments

        Design considerations for valves and instruments include the following.

        a) Valves and instruments such as pressure and temperature gauges in insulated piping should have stems of length 
           equal to at least twice the thickness of the insulation.

        b) If insulation will be frequently removed for maintenance or inspection (e.g. at relief valves), the insulation on the 
           pipework should be terminated and capped at a location that allows flange breaking without interference with the 
           sealed cap. Insulation and jacketing of isolation and relief valves should be independent of pipe insulation.


          9.5.5  Tankage

          Design considerations for tankage include the following.

          a) Roof Overhang on Fixed Roof Tanks—On a tank that is to be insulated the tank roof should overhang the shell by 
             at least the shell insulation thickness plus 2 in. (50 mm). This is to ensure that water running off the tank roof is led 
             away from the insulation. If the tank roof is also insulated, it helps prevent any moisture that has gotten into the 
             roof insulation from passing down into the insulation on the shell. 

          b) Ancillary Attachments to Tank Shells and Roofs—

             1) ancillary attachments such as ladders, stairways, level controls, etc. should have a standoff of at least four 
               times the insulation thickness;

             2) for roof-entry pipework supports, the pipe standoff should be a minimum of 6 in. (150 mm) greater than the 
               combined thickness of the insulation on the tank shell and the insulation thickness on the pipe.

          c) Double Shell Insulated Tanks—Double shell insulated tanks should be designed in such a way as to prevent 
             moisture getting into the void space. Double shell insulated tanks have the insulation installed in the void space 
             between the two shells.

          9.5.6  Small Bore Pipe and Fittings

          Small bore pipe and fittings can be particularly vulnerable to CUI because the wall thicknesses required for pressure 
          containment are small. Increasing the thickness of carbon steel small bore piping to provide a corrosion allowance 
          can add a safety factor, but it does not prevent CUI and does not remove the need to inspect for CUI. Some sites use 
          stainless steel for thin wall small bore piping and fittings. 

          9.5.7  Other Concerns

          9.5.7.1 Shelters from Prevailing Weather

          If there is a high concentration of insulated pipework and equipment in a small area in a location where precipitation is 
          likely to be frequent, a permanent shelter should be considered to be erected around the plant to protect the insulated 
          area from the weather. If rainfall is a regular feature of the local climate then insulated equipment enclosed in 
          weatherproof shelters is less likely to suffer from CUI.

          9.5.7.2 Walkways

          Steps and/or bridges as appropriate should be provided to allow personnel to cross low-level pipe tracks without 
          stepping on insulation. Damage to insulation caused by foot traffic on insulated piping can be an entry point for 
          moisture and has been a major contributor to increasing the likelihood of CUI.

          9.6  Insulation

          Design considerations for insulation include the following.

          a) Insulation materials should be installed in such a manner that the external surface should be as uniform as 
             possible and that the jacketing is applied and sealed properly. 

          b) Consider the use of standoffs between the insulation and the piping or vessel surface when fibrous insulation 
             materials are used in areas with a potential for CUI in order to keep wet insulation from direct contact with the 
             insulated surface.


        c) Some insulation materials have coefficients of linear expansion that are significantly different than steel. The 
           insulation system design should consider the installation of expansion and contraction joints to accommodate the 
           difference in expansion coefficients.

        d) Parts of the insulation system intended to be removed and replaced during unit operations, such as valve boxes, 
           need to be designed to undergo multiple removal/replacement cycles.

        9.7  Heat-traced Systems

        Steam-tracing systems are manufactured using carbon steel, copper, stainless steel, or nickel-based (i.e. Incoloy) 
       tubing materials. Though nickel-based tubing materials are expensive, they have a lower probability of in-service 
        failure and may be justified on high-criticality systems. At many sites, nickel-based tubing materials such as 
        Incoloy 825 are considered as standard for instrument systems where they are economic or risk appropriate.

        When extensive insulation removal is planned for a steam-traced system, consideration should be given to renewing the 
        associated tracing with tubing couplings/joints outside of the insulation, or replacement with an electric-traced system. 

        9.8  Protective Coatings and Caulk

        9.8.1 General

        The primary element in preventing CUI damage is to keep moisture from reaching the surface of the insulated 
        component. This can be achieved by either

          1) the application of coatings to the surface of the component, or 

          2) preventing moisture from penetrating the insulation system.

        A well-designed coating system applied to the surface of a component prior to insulation, together with a properly 
        insulated system, can provide greater resistance to CUI damage and reduced maintenance costs. In addition to the 
       benefits associated with the application of a protective surface coating system, the application and maintenance of 
        insulation jacket caulking is a critical component of preventing moisture from breaching the insulation system. 

        9.8.2 Coating Considerations

        A coating system should protect against water or corrosives for long periods. Highly permeable organic coatings allow 
       corrosion to start behind the coating even in the absence of breaks or pinholes. As a result, organic coating systems 
       that are suitable for immersion service are usually preferred where there is a potential for CUI damage. Typically, a 
       prime coat and topcoat are required to adequately protect a component from corrosion. Application of solely a primer 
       will not provide adequate corrosion resistance.

        Before a coating is applied to a component surfaces, the surface should be dry and clean from contaminants and rust. 
        For CUI applications, a white-metal blast cleaning (SSPC SP-5 or equivalent) is preferred, though a “good” near-
        white-metal blast cleaning (SSPC-10 or equivalent) may be acceptable. The adequacy of the surface preparation can 
        significantly impact the durability of the coating. For CUI applications, high-build epoxies or epoxy-phenolics are often 
       specified at temperatures up to about 250 °F (120 °C). At higher temperatures, a high-temperature coating (e.g. a 
        two-coat heat-resisting silicone coating) is required. 

        It should be noted that many coating systems fail after 10 years in service. After the coating breaks down, the bare 
        steel can be attacked by CUI. By contrast, TSA coatings are generally reported to have a useful service lifetime in 
       excess of 35 years though service life can be reduced because of improper coating application (see 11.5.4). 


          9.8.3  Caulking Considerations

          Caulking should be done immediately after the insulation jacket is installed since moisture could enter through the 
          open seams if left unsealed for a period of time. Protrusions or penetrations through the insulation, such as nozzles, 
          support lugs, and so forth, should be sealed with a bead of good caulking compound. In order to achieve a 
          satisfactory caulked joint, the separation between jacketing should not be greater than 3.2 mm (1/8 in.). A minimum of 
          6 mm (1/4 in.) of caulk should be applied to jacket joints. Caulking should not be featheredged since the life of the seal 
          depends on a uniform material thickness. Feathered edges curl and pull away from the jacketing. 

          Only silicone rubber caulking remains resilient for many years and is resistant to higher temperatures and many 
          chemicals. Pigmented (i.e. colored) silicone rubber caulking provides a higher temperature and UV resistance 
          compared to translucent-type caulk. With time, caulking materials dry out and lose flexibility. Areas around nozzles, 
          manways, and on vessel heads should be inspected periodically to maintain the integrity of the insulation system. 

          9.9  Shutdown/Mothballing

          There is a high potential for CUI damage of insulated carbon and low alloy steel on equipment that will be shutdown 
          or mothballed for an extended period. It is prudent to remove all insulation and fireproofing when equipment or piping 
          systems are mothballed. Generally, corrosion rates of carbon and low alloy steels under insulation are significantly 
          higher than atmospheric corrosion. 

          9.10   Quality Control/Quality Assurance

          The insulation materials used for each application need to comply with all applicable national or international 
          regulations. The site should obtain certificates of conformance for the insulation materials used. They should be 
          sufficiently detailed to show the applicable regulations. 

          The site should also establish a quality control system covering the materials being used. The quality control system 
          should cover all steps from insulation procurement through the installation process. The quality control system should 
          list the responsibilities of personnel inspecting the insulation materials and the responsibilities of personnel 
          supervising the installation work. It should also list all hold and witness points.

          10   Design Practices to Minimize CUF
          10.1   General

          10.1.1  Fireproofing is employed to minimize the escalation of a fire that would occur with the failure of structural 
          supports and the overheating of pressure vessels. The failure point for steel is generally considered to be 1000 °F 
          (537 °C). At this temperature, the yield strength of structural steel is roughly 50 % of its room temperature strength. 

          The goal of fireproofing is to prevent structural steel from reaching 1000 °F (537 °C) for some period of time to allow 
          more time for plant personnel to:

          a) evacuate,

          b) fight the fire,

          c) shut off the fuel supply for the fire, and 

          d) shut down the process to minimize the overall damage incurred.

          10.1.2  The traditional method of fireproofing has been pour-in-place concrete or gunite. Other fireproofing materials, 
          such as lightweight cements, prefabricated cementitious board, and intumescent coatings are used. Lightweight 
          coatings are used primarily in areas where weight reduction is a significant benefit. 


        10.1.3 The decision to fireproof is driven by risk-based analysis. One needs to first consider the nature of the fire 
       threat and then make an assessment of the required period of fire endurance for a wide variety of equipment 
       including structural steel, pressure vessels, heat exchangers, pipe supports, liquefied petroleum gas spheres, and 
       bullets, valves, and cable trays. The location of specific equipment within a process unit is important, as is a unit’s 
       location with regard to neighboring facilities. Guidance on the selection, application, and maintenance of fireproofing 
       systems is provided in API 2218.

        10.2  Dense and Lightweight Concrete

        Structural steelwork and vessel skirts with concrete or vermiculite cement fireproofing should be coated with 
        protective primers and topcoat sealers prior to fireproofing because of the effect of chlorides on the steel surface in 
       moist environments. Weather shields should be installed, where feasible, at the top edge of the sealed, fireproofed 
       joint to prevent water getting between the structural steel and the fireproofing. The use of nonpotable water and poor 
       mixing can lead to reduced durability of concrete and cementitious fireproofing. Using water that contains high levels 
        of chloride can lead to accelerated corrosion. Again, the buildup of corrosion products between the structural steel 
        and the fireproofing can cause cracking and spalling of the fireproofing.

        10.3  Lightweight Cementitious Products

        As in the preceding section, the base metal substrate also needs to be coated with protective primers and topcoat 
        sealers prior to fireproofing to diminish the risk for CUF. These materials are usually limited to areas that are not prone 
        to mechanical damage and are typically used in areas above a 10-ft (3-m) elevation. Mechanical damage of these 
        materials has been known to occur, thereby increasing the potential for CUF on the structure and reducing their 
       overall effectiveness as fireproofing.

        10.4  Intumescent Coatings and Subliming Compounds

        Coatings that provide fireproofing by intumescing or subliming develop good adhesion to properly coated steel. As a 
        result, the risk of CUF with these coatings is much reduced. It is important, however, that coating work conducted 
        prior to the application of the fireproofing is done to a high standard. It is important that the coatings are allowed to 
        properly cure before the fireproofing is applied. Additionally, the fireproofing may require overcoating to protect it from 
        long-term exposure to UV light. This exposure can be damaging to the fireproofing material. The fireproofing 
        manufacturer should be consulted for their recommendations on overcoating.

        10.5  Protective Coatings

        There is always a chance that water may get behind fireproofing. In such a case, the coating is all that is preventing 
        corrosion from occurring. It is therefore important that the proper coating be selected for the exposure conditions and 
        that the surface be prepared and the coating be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation.

        10.6  Quality Control/Quality Assurance

        Fireproofing materials have evolved from traditional materials (i.e. dense and lightweight concrete) to higher 
        technology materials (i.e. intumescent rigid/flexible epoxies, flexible endothermic wraps, etc.). Satisfactory 
        performance of fireproofing depends on knowledge of materials and application techniques. Inspection by qualified 
        personnel is also crucial in assuring that the fireproofing performs satisfactorily over the expected life of the 
       fireproofing. It is essential that site and contract personnel are familiar with the site specification and fireproofing 
       manufacturer’s requirements. API 2218 provides guidance on quality control of fireproofing.

          11   Maintenance and Mitigation of CUI/CUF Issues
          11.1   General

          Properly designed and installed insulation systems should normally require little maintenance. However, failing 
          insulation systems are very often detected only when in poor shape and require significant repair. Routine 
          maintenance practice should be extended by periodic scheduled inspections, preventive maintenance, and can 
          include a long-term strategy based on RBI principles. 

          Shortcomings can then be detected at the earliest stage, preventing uncontrolled deterioration of the insulation 
          system with consequential risk of CUI. In particular, inspection surveys should be carried out after shutdowns 
          because during shutdowns insulation systems are sometimes removed and not properly reinstalled or the systems 
          are damaged (e.g. because of falling scaffolding poles). 

          After an inspection survey has been completed, the reported damage and remarks should be translated into a plan of 
          action for remedial and preventive maintenance. The recommendations for preventive maintenance needs to be 
          prioritized for follow-up actions to prevent future or repeated damage to insulation or the underlying surfaces. Issues 
          that should be considered are as follows.

          a) Preventing water ingress due to inadequacy of design by:

             1) repositioning of supports and brackets;                                                            

             2) avoiding spraying firewater during fire drills on insulated tanks or equipment; and 

             3) installing rainwater shields; and

             4) damaged or saturated insulation should be discarded and the insulated metal surfaces cleaned, derusted, and 
               coated before installing the new insulating material.

          b) Preventing insulation/jacketing damage due to operations or maintenance activities by:

             1) installing a walkway and/or platform over insulated pipes in a pipe track or at piping manifolds;

             2) rerouting of pedestrians by putting up hand railings;

             3) providing instructions to contractor/scaffolding personnel regarding appropriate protection of site insulation 
               systems.

          c) Removing unneeded insulation.

          11.2  Programmed/Condition-based Maintenance 

          Based on the results of inspection surveys, the scope of long-term insulation maintenance can be determined and 
          priorities can be set in accordance with the reliability-centered maintenance principles. 

          In order to systematically control the upgrading of existing insulation in a plant, the various units should be divided into 
          manageable areas indicated on a plot plan and the work carried out by area. Simultaneously, maintenance painting in 
          the same area should be scheduled. 

          Progress of work can then be properly recorded, and costs for scaffolding should decrease substantially as compared 
          to when piping systems are followed or when work is carried out randomly throughout the plant. It should be noted 
          that risk mitigation needs to be balanced with effective cost management. Site personnel should determine the 
          effectiveness of block rejuvenation recognizing that some higher risk equipment/piping will not be mitigated until the 
          block maintenance crew arrives at a later date.


        11.3  Execution 

        When executing maintenance work, care should be taken to remove existing insulation materials in order to allow 
        their reuse. Slabs, pipe sections, or preformed covers for valves, fittings, etc. should be removed carefully and 
        properly stored. 

        Temporary protection should be provided to adjacent insulation to prevent damage or water ingress during 
        mechanical maintenance work. 

        After repair of damaged hot insulation, the jacketing of the replaced area and its direct vicinity should be checked to 
        establish proper repair of the weather protection of the complete system. For cold insulation, the vapor barrier of the 
        replaced area should be applied with sufficient overlap on the existing undamaged vapor barrier. 

        11.4  Deluge System Issues

        All of the normal inspection issues associated with CUI will also apply in areas under deluge systems. Periodic 
        inspection using either neutron back backscatter or IR thermography should be considered because of the high 
        potential for finding wet insulation in these systems. Periodic maintenance of the weather shield is an important step 
        in preventing CUI damage of equipment under deluge systems and should include:
          1) repair of damage to the weather shield,

          2) inspection and removal of drain hole blockages,

          3) resealing of any damaged weather shield seams,

          4) repair of damaged coatings when detected,

          5) routine external visual inspections of the integrity of the insulation system.

        11.5  Mitigation of CUI Damage

        11.5.1 General

        There are several approaches that are used to mitigate CUI damage. These include approaches to protecting the 
        surface of the metallic piping (i.e. organic coatings, TSA, and aluminum foil for stainless steel), the installation of 
        protective cages in locations where piping is insulated solely for personnel protection, and performing periodic 
        maintenance on the insulation system.

        11.5.2 Organic Coatings 

        The application of organic coatings on carbon steel equipment beneath insulation is an effective method of having a 
        physical barrier to the corrosive electrolytes Organic coatings are effective only if the surface has been prepared 
       properly and a holiday-free coated surface is obtained. In general, the average life of an organic coating system is 5 
       to 13 years. In some cases, when a correctly selected and applied coating system is used, a 20-year service life can 
       be achieved. Some of the parameters that need to be considered when selecting a coating system include: 

        —   surface-preparation requirements,

        —   environmental requirements,

        —   compatibility with insulating material,

        —   coating tests,


          —   coating vendor selection,

          —   specifications,

          —   inspection,

          —   selection of a coating applicator.

          Coating systems that have been used successfully in the process industries include liquid-applied coatings like 
          epoxies, urethanes, and polyurethanes; fusion-bonded coatings; brushable coal tar or asphalt-based coatings; 
          mineralization coatings; and tapes. More information on the selection of protective coatings is available from coating 
          manufacturers’ literature and in NACE SP0198.

          11.5.3  Aluminum Foil to Protect Austenitic/Duplex Stainless Steel

          Experience has shown that organic coatings do not necessarily provide an effective barrier to ECSCC. When properly 
          installed, aluminum foil wrapping of piping is a effective method to protect austenitic and duplex stainless steel from 
          ECSCC. The primary benefit of aluminum foil wrapping is by acting as a sacrificial anode to provide electrochemical 
          (i.e. cathodic) protection against ECSCC. The wrapped aluminium foil may also act as a barrier, but its ability to serve 
          as a barrier is highly dependent on its application.

          Prior to wrapping, the surface should be washed with demineralized water to remove chloride from the uncoated piping. 
          Solvent cleaning (i.e. SSPC SP-1) is not necessary unless oil or grease is present on the surface. Aluminum foil 
          wrapping of the piping takes less time to install than applying a coating to the surface of the pipe. As shown in Figure 22, 
          vertical sections of piping should be wrapped from the lowest point of the run to the highest point of the run to prevent 
          water from getting under the aluminum foil. Aluminum or stainless wire should be used to hold the foil in place. Foil 
          should be molded around flanges and fittings. Steam-traced lines should be double wrapped, with the first layer applied 
          directly to the pipe, followed by the steam tracing, and then the second layer of foil over the top of the steam tracing.  

          Although aluminium foil has been effective in preventing ECSCC under thermal insulation on austenitic and duplex 
          stainless steel piping and vessels, its use may be limited to application on piping of 24 in. NPS or smaller based on 
          economics. Above 24 in. NPS, piping and vessels use of TSA is generally more economic. Successful long-term use 
          of aluminium foil relies on the maintenance of the weatherproofing system. While the aluminium foil does provide 
          protection from ECSCC in immersion conditions its life is greatly reduced.

          11.5.4  Thermal Spray Aluminium to Protect Steel
          Thermally sprayed aluminum coatings are applied by either the electric arc spraying (also referred to as metallizing) 
          or oxy-fuel wire spraying (also referred to as flame spraying) process (see Figure 23 and Figure 24).  


        In the electric spray process (Figure 23), the two aluminum wires are continuously fed toward each other to the gun tip at 
        a uniform speed. A low-voltage direct current power supply is used, with one wire serving as the cathode and the other 
        as the anode. As the wires leave the wire guides, they produce an electric arc at the point just before the wires meet. 
        The high-temperature arc [>9000 °F (>5500 °C)] that is produced melts the wires. High-pressure compressed air, 
       injected into the gun, produces a fine spray of aluminum droplets. As the spherical droplets impact the surface, they 
       flatten to produce a platelet-like structure that is a mixture of coating, oxides, and porosity. A high magnification view of 
       the deposit cross section is shown in Figure 23. The particles are mechanically bonded to the metal substrate.

        In the oxy-fuel wire spray process (see Figure 24), drive rollers continuously feed the wire to the tip of the spray gun. 
        A mixture of a combustion gas (i.e. either acetylene, propane, or methyl acetylene-propadiene) and oxygen are 
        combined and ignited at the tip of the spray gun to melt the wire. The molten metal is then atomized by the 
        surrounding jet of compressed air, creating a stream of aluminum droplets that are propelled to the metal substrate. 
        The flame temperature of the combusted gas is significantly lower than the arc temperature of two-wire electric 


          process [i.e. ~3100 °F (~1700 °C)]. Flame spray deposits are primarily mechanically bonded to the metal substrate 
          and have lower bond strength than the two-wire electric spray process. 

          Since weather barriers and insulation are often not well maintained at regular intervals, a good, well-adhered surface 
          coating is an important parameter in preventing CUI damage to the equipment and piping. Another key factor to a 
          long service life for the coating is a well prepared surface. At a minimum, the surface needs to be prepared to a near-
          white-metal blast cleaned surface (SSPC SP-10 or equivalent).

          Aluminum’s affinity for oxygen and adherent and nonwater soluble oxide provides long-term CUI protection by serving 
          as a barrier film and then providing catholic protection to the underlying carbon steel at breaks in the coating. TSA 
          applications emit no volatile organic compounds and do not require “dry time” between coats. Two key elements to 
          minimize the potential for CUI include having a surface that has been abrasively blasted to a near-white-metal 
          condition (i.e. SSPC SP-10 or greater) and a coating thickness of 0.010 in. (0.25 mm). The minimum thickness of 
          10 mils, applied in one application by a crosshatched spray pattern, deposits a near pore free barrier surface with 
          minimum size that will fill with aluminum oxide in service. 

          The importance of applied thickness in determining service life of the TSA is illustrated in Equation (1), developed by 
          Thomason 11. 
                     0.64 × t
                        As
          where 

               SL   is the service life (years);

               tTSA is the thickness (µm);

               As   is the percent of area of bare steel. 

          TSA coatings are generally reported to have a useful service lifetime in excess of 35 years. Within the past few years 
          there have been a few reports of TSA coatings failure in offshore applications after less than 10 years service. Factors 
          that can influence the performance of TSA coatings include the following.

          a) Quality of Surface Preparation—The steel surface should be prepared to an SSPC SP-10 or SIS Sa 2 1/2 surface 
             finish.

          b) Quality of the Wire—The wire should be free of kinks and should not contain visible oxide particles on the surface 
             of the wire that could affect application, density, or adhesion of the coating.

          c) Environmental Conditions—The relative humidity should be less than 85 %, and the steel surface temperature 
             should be at least 5 °F (3 °C) above the dew point throughout the blasting and coating process.

          d) Coating Thickness—The as-applied TSA thickness should not be less than 0.010 in. (250 µm) thick.

          e) Sealer Application—When overcoated with an organic coating, the seal coat should not be greater than 0.002 in. 
             (50 µm) thick.

          f) Applicator/Operator Experience—When a applicator/operator has limited experience, the owner/user should 
             consider increased QA/QC controls.

          11 Thomason, W. H., “Cathodic Protection of Submerged Steel with Thermally Sprayed Aluminum Coatings,” Corrosion 84, 
             Paper 338.

        The service life approximation based on Equation (1) does not take into account the barrier effect of the TSA coating. 
        It only takes into account that the failure mode of TSA is from anodic dissolution of the aluminum as it supplies 
        cathodic protection to the carbon steel. 

        11.5.5 Tape Wraps

        Petroleum-based tape wrapped systems have been developed to protect metal surfaces in severe environments for 
        difficult to protect geometries [see Figure 25 a)]. These systems are typically composed of:

          1) a surface priming paste to displace surface moisture, passivate surface oxides, and fill in small irregularities in 
            the substrate;

          2) a mastic filler to ease contours around irregular shapes such as pipe joints, flanges, valves, bolts, and other 
             irregular shapes; and

          3) a nonwoven bonded synthetic fabric, fully impregnated, and coated with natural petroleum.


          a) Nonwoven Bonded Synthetic Fabric Impregnated with Natural Petroleum Being Applied to a Mastic
                                                     Coated Surface


                             b) PVC Film Being Applied Over a Petroleum-based Tape Wrap

          Prior to application of the priming paste, the surface should be solvent cleaned (per SSPC SP-1) to remove dirt, 
          grease, and oil from the surface. In addition, weld spatter and sharp points/edges should also be removed. Hand or 
          power tools (per SSPC SP-2/SSPC SP-3 or SSI St. 2/SSI St. 3) can be used to remove loose surface rust, paint, and 
          foreign matter from the surface. High-pressure water blasting may be used to prepare the surface.

          In some situations, a stabilized, plasticized, PVC film coated with an anticorrosive pressure sensitive adhesive can be 
          used to wrap over petrolatum tapes to provide color coding and additional protection [see Figure 25 b)]. These 
          systems wraps have been used in some offshore applications to replace metallic jacketed insulation because of their 
          ability to provide an improved sealing capability. 

          11.5.6  Personnel Protective Cages

          Equipment or piping operating above 140 °F (60 °C) poses a risk to personnel when skin comes in contact with the 
          hot metal surface. In many instances, these surfaces are insulated for the sole purpose of personnel protection from 
          the hot metal surface. The unnecessary use of thermal insulation creates a location for potential corrosion. In these 
          cases, the insulation should be removed and wire “standoff” cages should be used instead. These cages are simple 
          in design, low in cost, and eliminate CUI concerns and costs associated with maintenance of the insulation system. 
          Examples of different types of personnel protective cages are shown in Figure 26.


          Figure 26—Photograph of a Personnel Protective Cage on a Vertical and Elbow Section of Piping (left) and 
                                  a Removable Personnel Protective Cage on a Valve (right)

          11.5.7  Insulation System Maintenance

          11.5.7.1 General

          Regardless of the type of jacketing and insulation, jacketing is used to ensure both the short-term and long-term 
          performance of the insulation in the particular application. Assuming the insulation system has been properly 
          designed and installed correctly, it will only perform as designed if properly maintained. 

          11.5.7.2 Jacketing

          Breaches in the jacketing system, as shown in Figure 2, serve as potential access points for water ingress. The areas 
          directly below these jacketing breaches are prone to CUI damage. Damage is likely to occur at the low point of the 
          piping run where water can accumulate. The solution to this problem is to make sure the insulation is properly 
          supported, replace damaged insulation, and reinstall the insulation jacketing. 


        11.5.7.3 Caulking

        Figure 27 shows one of the piping segments (i.e. left arrow) with newly jacketed insulation system. The lap and butt 
        joints of the jacketing are effectively sealed with caulk piping to prevent moisture ingress. However, when 
        temperatures change, materials expand and contract causing cracks in the caulking, allowing moisture to penetrate 
        the insulation system. Damage to the caulk seal may not be detected until the jacketing is removed. If undetected, 
        CUI of the piping can occur. The only effective solution for this issue is to periodically dismantle a section, inspect the 
        sealants, and determine whether the entire system needs to be resealed. 

        11.5.7.4 Insulation

        Figure 27 also shows one of the piping segments (i.e. on right) with significant damage to the insulation system, both 
        the insulation and jacketing, due to excessive foot traffic. Failure to replace this insulation system may result in 
       excessively high heat loss and water intrusion. This has the potential to cause CUI damage to the piping. One 
        solution to this problem would be to replace the entire insulation system and to modify site maintenance practices to 
        avoid damage to insulated piping systems. An alternate approach would be to replace the insulation with high 
        compressive strength material.

        11.5.8 Installation Craftsmanship

        11.5.8.1 General

        Installation craftsmanship of jacketing/weather barriers can have a great effect on an insulation system’s performance 
        and life. It is a critical problem with those insulation systems that operate in the CUI temperature range, cycle in 
        temperatures, or may be shut down for periods of time. A poorly installed insulation system ultimately lets moisture or 
        corrosive chemicals into the insulation, and often to the insulated surface, allowing the start of CUI. 

        11.5.8.2 Caulking and Sealants

        Caulking and sealants are barriers to moisture intrusion and may be installed improperly in a number of ways. They 
        may not be installed (see Figure 28) or may be installed incorrectly either by missing sections or by wiping or 
       smoothing the sealant bead once it has been installed.

       Smoothing the sealant is often done to provide a more attractive finished appearance but may result in a large 
       amount of the sealant material being removed. This can potentially reduce the life of the sealant and increase the 
        chance of a leak. 


          11.5.8.3 Jacketing

          Jacket materials installed with improper “fit and finish” provide easy path for water access (see Figure 29). Gaps 
          between jacket components larger than 0.125 in. (3.2 mm) cannot be successfully sealed with caulking and sealants. 
          Stresses and natural movement between these parts can cause the sealants to fail prematurely, letting in moisture 
          and contaminating the insulation.  


          Jacketing or weather barriers can also be installed improperly by not providing the proper ability to shed rain (see 
          Figure 30). On vertical sections, this happens when lower sections of the jacketing material are installed over the top 
          of the upper sections. On horizontal sections, it happens when the lap section is installed close to the top or bottom of 
          piping rather than to the sides. It can also happen when a section of jacketing is wrapped around the insulation such 
          that the upper section of the jacket horizontal lap is overlapped by the lower section. All of these installation errors 
          allow water into the insulation system. 

          Insulation terminations (i.e. end caps) are places where jacketing can be installed improperly. Sometimes they can be 
          omitted entirely with obvious CUI risks. In addition, end caps installed on vertical lines that are improperly sealed or 
          without attention to shedding rainwater can lead to CUI problems (see Figure 31). 

          The final craftsmanship issue relates to storage and handling of insulation materials prior to installation. Insulation 
          materials need to be stored in a dry location and need to be protected from exposure to rain and weather prior to 


        installation of the jacketing. Insulation materials stored on the ground without any water-resistant covering can lead to 
        insulation being installed wet. 

        11.6  Mitigation of CUF Damage

        Corrosion on structural members protected by fireproofing causes multiple problems. Initially, the trapping of water 
       behind the fireproofing causes corrosion of the structural member. The steel corrosion products occupy a much 
       greater volume than the uncorroded steel. This leads to cracks forming in the fireproofing that allow greater water 
        ingress. In colder environments this can be exacerbated by the expansion that occurs as the water freezes.

        There are several factors that promote CUF damage on vessel skirts and structural steel supports. Poor design of the 
        fireproofing system can result in trapping water between the fireproofing and the underlying steel. Also, inadequate 



          sealing of the fireproofing-to-steel termination joint may also allow water to be trapped behind the fireproofing. The 
          lack of protective coatings on fireproofed substrates can contribute to rapid corrosion. Approaches to these issues 
          include:

          a) installation of weather shields to direct water away from fireproofing terminations,

          b) painting fireproofed substrates for corrosion protection. 

          In addition to the above, it should be noted that when intumescent or subliming fireproofing compounds are used, the 
          fireproofing manufacturer needs to provide a list of compatible coatings for use with their material. Also, inorganic zinc 
          coatings used on their own are not effective coatings under fireproofing. Zinc is amphoteric and can be attacked in the 
          alkaline conditions that exist beneath concrete and cementitious fireproofing.

          11.7  Repair Techniques/Strategies

          11.7.1  General

          The repair of CUI on equipment and piping depends on the degree (i.e. severity) of damage of the component. When 
          CUI is within the original corrosion allowance for the component, the repair strategy might be as simple as cleaning 
          the corroded surface and repainting the affected area. When CUI damage is beyond the original corrosion allowance 
          for the component, the repair strategy could be complex involving Fitness-For-Service (FFS) analysis along with 
          section replacement or extensive weld buildup. 

          When developing an appropriate repair strategy, site personnel need to establish whether the repair will be temporary 
          or permanent. As indicated API 510 and API 570, temporary repairs should be removed and replaced with a suitable 
          permanent repair at the next available maintenance opportunity. Temporary repairs may remain in place for a longer 
          period of time only if approved and documented as required by the appropriate API in-service inspection code. 

          11.7.2  Carbon and Low Alloy Steel Repairs

          11.7.2.1 Surface Coatings

          The use of surface coatings may be considered when CUI damage does not exceed the original corrosion allowance 
          of the component. Any surface coating that is considered should be resistant to hot water immersion since the 
          environment under insulation is very aggressive toward coatings. A key parameter in maximizing the life of a surface 
          coating is the quality of the surface preparation and the cleanliness of the surface. NACE SP0198 lists typical coating 
          systems used for carbon steel and austenitic/duplex stainless steel equipment and piping, along with:

          —   temperature range for each coating system,

          —   level of surface preparation requirements,

          —   surface profile requirements,

          —   recommended thickness range for prime, and 

          —   topcoat.

          11.7.2.2 Weld Repairs

          When the wall loss of the component exceeds the original corrosion allowance, a FFS analysis should be considered. 
          When a FFS analysis indicates that continued operation is not an acceptable option, the equipment or piping system 
          should be removed from service in order to affect a repair. A typical repair strategy for a locally corroded area would 
          be to restore the wall thickness by weld buildup of the damaged area. As with any weld repair, the damaged area 


        needs to be cleaned and prepared for welding. Typically, these repairs are made while the equipment or piping 
        system is not in service. An in-service repair is possible provided that necessary proper precautions for in-service 
        welding are taken. An evaluation of the type of insulation adjacent to the welding area should be conducted to 
        determine if it is flammable or has absorbed a flammable substance. It may be necessary to conduct a risk 
       assessment as part of the development of the repair strategy.

        11.7.2.3 Engineered Enclosures

        Engineered enclosures are generally considered temporary repairs since there is no strength weld attaching the 
        enclosure to the piping. They are engineered mechanical sleeves, boxes, or clamps filled with a variety of resin 
       compounds to seal leaking pipes. These types of repairs encapsulate thinned or leaking sections and are often 
       sealed by proprietary injected sealing compounds. As with all temporary repairs, they should be removed and 
        replaced with a suitable permanent repair at the next available maintenance opportunity. Concerns regarding these 
       methods include the following.

        —   Engineered enclosures may not be suitable when the system is subject to significant thermal cycling. 

        —   Consider the need to reinject after plant upset.

        —   Engineered enclosures can be bulky and heavy.

        —   External support may be needed to avoid overstressing the system (ensure allowance is made for thermal 
            cycling). 

        —   Generally this form of clamp will only restore the ability of the piping system to withstand internal pressure and 
            hence may not protect against failure due to external loading if the system is corroded below the minimum 
            required thickness.

        —   Proprietary design and calculation techniques should be verified by the owner/operator’s design engineer. 

        —   The sealant is applied at the point of contact with the parent metal.

        —   It generally requires a reasonable degree of surface cleanliness at the sealant contact points. This can be difficult 
            to achieve if the surface is substantially pitted and corroded externally, so the box may be very large in order to 
            extend to an area that is not corroded.


        —   Boxes that are fixed to the line by clamping between flange pairs are usually successful.               

        —   However, boxes that are fixed to bare pipe surfaces and rely on the sealant properties of the injected compound 
            sometimes fail to achieve tight seals. They will, however, reduce the leakage to atmosphere to a level that may 
            be considered sustainable in the short term. Improved results can be obtained using gland material as a 
            secondary sealant.

        A log of all engineered enclosures should be maintained by the site.

        11.7.2.4 Composite Wraps

        An alternative repair strategy for piping with CUI damage is the use of composite wrap systems. There are a variety of 
        these systems ranging from fiberglass/polymer systems, woven carbon fiber/polymer systems, and systems that are 
        a combination of fiberglass, carbon fiber, and polymer. These wraps protect and structurally reinforce the corroded 
       pipe in the same manner as steel sleeves. The strain is transferred into the composite wrap, and pipe deformation is 
       effectively constrained. Using this approach, the undamaged material around the corroded area is cleaned to achieve 
        a good surface finish to adhere the composite wrap. An incompressible filler is essential to ensure that all of the 
       plastic deformation of the pipe’s thinner wall section is directly transferred into the composite repair. The deeper the 
       corrosion, the greater the possible membrane bulging, it is therefore essential to ensure the filler is incompressible. 
        Adhesive is applied to the pipe surface to provide good bonding with the wrap material. In some cases, the wrap is 

          fabricated composite sleeve wound around the pipe. In other instances, the cleaned area is encapsulated by a steel 
          sleeve, and the sleeve is then filled with a resin material to bond the sleeve to the pipe when cured. 

          The pressure/temperature limits for these wraps are dependent on the type of damage being repaired and the repair 
          system being used. The limits for each of these systems are determined by the testing and qualification requirements 
          outlined in ASME PCC-2 and ISO 24817. As such it is classed as an engineered repair, both reference documents 
          are based on the same source-work and broadly equivalent. They require the system to have undergone a series of 
          validation tests and use the data measured to assess each repair for the given set of design conditions. The 
          documents require a set of calculation to be completed that determine the thickness of repair required. In principle 
          each repair should be individually designed. 

          11.7.2.5 Pipe Clamps

          Compression clamps have been in general use in the industry for sealing isolated pitting leaks. These types of clamps 
          may be applied to temperatures in excess of 175 °F (80 °C), and they can be rated to high pressures. Since these 
          clamps rely on compressing the parent pipe, it is essential to confirm that the remaining wall thickness is adequate to 
          withstand the compressive forces that will be applied.

          11.7.3  Austenitic and Duplex Stainless Steels

          11.7.3.1 Crack Removal

          If ECSCC cracking is not extensive and is within the original corrosion allowance for the component, it can be 
          removed by blend grinding with the adjacent material. Milling and other similar techniques can also be used to 
          remove cracks. Blend ground areas should be examined by the liquid penetrant examination (PT)  or eddy current 
          examination (ET) methods to determine whether all cracks have been removed from the surface. Blend ground areas 
          should be aluminum wrapped or coated after the repair is performed.

          11.7.3.2 Patch or Insert Plate Repairs

          Patch or insert plates may be considered as repair strategies if cracking is not extensive. The undamaged area 
          should be inspected by ET. After assessing the extent of damage using ET, the material containing ECSCC damage 
          should be removed and prepared for welding. Prior to welding, the material adjacent to the area planned for repair 
          should be reinspected using ET to ensure that no cracking has occurred as a result of the material removal and weld 
          preparation process (i.e. because of stresses associated with cutting/grinding). It may be necessary to consult a FFS 
          specialist prior to repair. Repairs should be aluminum wrapped or coated after the repair is performed.

          11.7.3.3 Partial Replacement

          When ECSCC cracking is extensive but confined to one particular area [i.e. such as the upper portion of a column 
          that operates below 350 °F (175 °C)], partial replacement of equipment could be considered as the possible repair 
          strategy. In the example cited, the upper portion of the column could be replaced. Partial replacement of a column can 
          be very costly. As a result, the cost effectiveness of this approach needs to be compared to other possible alternate 
          repair strategies.

          11.7.3.4 Complete Replacement

          Obviously, replacement of an entire vessel or piping system is an extreme approach to resolving a CUI problem. The 
          decision to replace equipment or piping should only be considered after a thorough review of the economic cost and 
          other impacts of all repair strategy options.

        11.8  Safety Issues

        11.8.1 General

        Safety precautions are important in during maintenance or inspection activities because some process fluids are 
       harmful to human health. Any maintenance, inspection, or repair work on in-service equipment poses hazards that 
       need to be risk assessed prior to initiation of the activity. When conducting these activities, personnel should review 
       the site safety procedures prior to the initiation of work. A leak or failure in a piping system may be only a minor 
       inconvenience, or it may become a potential source of fire or explosion, depending on the temperature, pressure, 
       contents, and location of the piping. Piping in a petrochemical plant may carry flammable fluids, acids, alkalis, and 
       other harmful chemicals that would make leaks dangerous to personnel.

        11.8.2 Maintenance/Cleaning Hazards

        11.8.2.1 General

        There are potential risks associated with the removal of the jacketing and insulation. The removal of the insulation 
        from in-service piping potentially exposes hot metal surfaces. If personnel contact the hot (or cold) surface, they may 
        be exposed to injury (i.e. burns). Removal of surface scale on piping can also lead to a process leak if the CUI 
        damage is significant. This would expose personnel to the leakage of hot fluids. 

        In addition to these hazards, there are other concerns related to how scale is removed from the surface of the 
       component. Cleaning personnel need to be careful to avoid coming in contact with blasting grit or debris from the 
       cleaning process. Personnel performing hydroblasting should avoid contact with high-pressure water when removing 
       external corrosion scale. 

        11.8.2.2 Asbestos and Lead Coating Removal

        Surfaces coated with lead-based coatings or insulated with asbestos also require special precautions and 
        experienced contractors when being removed from surfaces with CUI damage. Before any work with asbestos or lead 
        coating is carried out, OSHA regulations (29 CFR Part 1910.1001) require employers to make an assessment of the 
        likely exposure of employees to asbestos and lead dust, including providing a description of the precautions that need 
        to be taken to control dust to protect workers and others from exposure. 

        11.8.3 Inspection Hazards

        11.8.3.1 General

        In order to assess the condition of the piping, it is often necessary for personnel to be able to see the clean pipe 
        surface. This necessitates removal of the scale from the pipe surface. Often this is done using either a file or a flapper 
        wheel. There have been instances where minimal removal of surface scale has caused a hole in the piping. When 
        equipment is in operation, it is necessary to evaluate the risks associated with preparing the surface prior to 
        inspection. Removing scale on thinned piping can expose inspection personnel to hot process fluid. Often, inspection 
        personnel will inspect piping for thinned areas by tapping a hammer on the surface of the piping. Thinned areas will 
       sound different than areas that are thicker. Here too, areas that are corroded may develop a hole from hammering if 
       they are severely thinned, exposing inspection personnel to hot process fluid. This should not be done on operating 
       equipment. 

        When equipment is in operation, it is necessary to evaluate the risks associated with preparing the surface prior 
       inspection. Removing scale on thinned piping can expose inspection personnel to hot process fluid. 

        11.8.3.2 Work on Operating Equipment 

        Intrusive work on operating equipment should be performed only after careful review. Often it is very difficult to assess 

        the condition of insulated equipment for CUI damage. It may be necessary to use several inspection techniques to 

          minimize exposures. When it is necessary to remove corrosion product, some things to consider include the 
          thickness of the scale, remaining corrosion allowance, and inspection effectiveness. Activities such as sandblasting 
          and scraping areas with heavy scale should be avoided on live equipment. When that is impractical, a job hazards 
          review should be considered. An epoxy coating of equipment with a scale sealing paint may be desired until a 
          shutdown window can be met.



                                                                           Annex A
                                                                         (informative)
                               Examples of a Qualitative Likelihood Assessment System

             A.1      General

             There are a variety of approaches and methodologies that can be employed in conducting likelihood assessments. 
             Shown below is a simplistic approach to demonstrate how a points-based approach might be employed and is 
             presented only as an example. When utilizing a points-based approach, the relative weighting of each factor, or 
             additional factors impacting CUI or CUF damage at a site, should be based on site experience.

             A.2      CUI Assessment for Carbon and Low Alloy Steels

                                                                        Parameter Rating

              Parameter                   01                                                         3                                 5

                                                             25 °F to 100 °F                 100 °F to 170 °F          170 °F to 230 °F or cyclic service 
                                                                                                                                                 
              Operating                                    or 270 °F to 350 °F              or 230 °F to 270 °F             from >350 °F to <230 °F
              Temperature                                    (–4 °C to 38 °C                  (38 °F to 77 °F           (77 °C to 110 °C or cyclic service 
                                                           or 132 °C to 177°C)              or 110 °C to 132 °C)           from >177 °C to <110 °C)

                                   Quality coating 
                                   within 8 yeas or  Quality coating within 15 years or                                 General coating age >15 years, 
              Coating/Age                                                              General coating 8 to 15 years
                                     system age           system age <30 years                                        system age >30 years, or unknown
                                      <15 years

              Jacketing/           System age <5       Average condition with good 
              Insulation            years without    maintenance (such as sealed, no   Average condition with some      Damaged condition with several 
                                                                                                deficiencies                      deficiencies
              Condition              deficiencies      gaps, CML ports with plugs)

                                                      High-integrity steam system or    Steam system with medium 
              Heat Tracing              None                                                                            Steam system with visible leaks
                                                             electric tracing                     integrity

                                                                                                                         Coastal/marine, cooling tower 
              External                                                                                                 overspray, or local external water 
                                     No sweating             Arid and inland                 All other locations
              Environment                                                                                              source exposure (deluge systems, 
                                                                                                                          dripping steam condensate)

                                      Insulating      Expanded perlite, foam glass,   Fiberglass, perlite, mineral fiber. Calcium silicate, mineral fiber with 
              Insulation Type
                                       coating               closed-cell foam            Insulation has <10 ppm Cl         >10 ppm Cl, or unknown

              Line Size or 
              Nozzle Size            Equipment                    >6 in.                       >2 in. to 6 in.                       ≤2 in.

                                                                        Likelihood Rating

                           Parameter Rating Total              <7            7 to <14         14 to 20        >20 to 27          >27

                           Likelihood Rating                    ABCDE

             NOTE       System age is defined as the time since last insulation/jacketing installation or replacement.



             A.3      CUI Assessment for Austenitic and Duplex Stainless Steels

                                                                        Parameter Rating

              Parameter                     01                                                         3                              5

              Operating                                          120 °F to 140 °F              250 °F to 400 °F                140 °F to 250 °F
              Temperature                                         (47 °C to 60 °C)            (121 °C to 204 °C)               (60 °C to 121 °C)

              Coating/Age          Quality coating within Quality coating within 15 years    General coating 8 to        General coating >15 years or 
                                         8 years                                                   15 years                       unknown

              Jacketing/                                    Average condition with good 
              Insulation             No deficiencies     maintenance (such as sealed, no    Average condition with     Damaged condition with several 
                                                                                               some deficiencies                 deficiencies
              Condition                                     gaps, CML ports with plugs)

              Heat Tracing                None             High-integrity steam system or     Steam system with       Steam system with visible leaks or 
                                                          electric tracing (Cl-free covering)  medium integrity          electrical with PVC covering

                                                                                                                      Coastal and marine, cooling tower 
              External                 No sweating                Arid and inland              All other locations    overspray, or external water source 
              Environment                                                                                             exposure (deluge systems, dripping 
                                                                                                                              steam condensate)

                                                           Expanded perlite, foam glass,      Fiberglass, perlite,     Calcium silicate, mineral fiber with 
              Insulation Type       Insulating coating                                      mineral fiber. Insulation 
                                                                 closed-cell foam           has less than 10 ppm Cl        >10 ppm Cl, or unknown

              Line Size or              Equipment                     >6 in.                     >2 in. to 6 in.                    ≤2 in.
              Nozzle Size

                                                                        Likelihood Rating

                           Parameter Rating Total              <7            7 to <14         14 to 17        >20 to 27          >27

                           Likelihood Rating                    ABCDE


             NOTE       Duplex stainless steels are more resistant to ECSCC, and it may be warranted to increase parameter rating.



Copyright American Petroleum Institute 
Provided by IHS under license with API                                            Licensee=Formosa Plastics Group /5924677001, User=lee, min-che
No reproduction or networking permitted without license from IHS                  Not for Resale, 05/31/2015 20:17:35 MDT
          80                                                   API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 583

          A.4     CUF Assessment

                                                                    Parameter Rating

           Parameter                       013                                                                                   5

           Operating                                          120 °F to 140 °F           250 °F to 400 °F                 140 °F to 250 °F
           Temperature                                        (47 °C to 60 °C)          (121 °C to 204 °C)                (60 °C to 121 °C)

                                 Quality coating within     Quality coating within 
           Coating/Age          8 years or system age      15 years or system age      General coating 8 to    General coating >15 years, system age 
                                                                                            15 years                   >30 years, or unknown
                                      <15 years                  <30 years
                                                                                                                                                           
           Fireproofing          System age <5 years       Average condition with     Average condition with            Damaged condition
           Condition              without deficiencies       good maintenance            cracking evident

           Potential for                 None                        —                         —                Design allows for water ingress/travel 
           Water Ingress                                                                                                    from above

                                                                                                                 Coastal and marine, cooling tower 
           External 
                                     No sweating               Arid and inland          All other locations      overspray, or external water source 
           Environment                                                                                           exposure (deluge systems, dripping 
                                                                                                                         steam condensate)

           Material Type         Intumescent coating           Cementitious                    —               Calcium silicate, mineral fiber insulation


                                                                    Likelihood Rating

                        Parameter Rating Total              <7            7 to <12        12 to 16        >16 to 19           >19

                        Likelihood Rating                    ABCDE


          NOTE       System age is defined as the time since last insulation/jacketing installation or replacement.
                                                                                                                                                       Annex B
                                                                                                                                                  (informative)
                                                           Examples of Insulation Techniques for Various Applications

                           B.1              General

                           Shown below are a variety of designs to insulate a variety of components.

                           B.1.1               Cold Service Applications        

   EXPLORE
    SOME                                                       MORE
           Check out more of API’s certification and training programs, standards, statistics and publications.

     API Monogram™ Licensing Program         API Engine Oil Licensing and            API-U®
                                                                    ™
     Sales:  877-562-5187                    Certification System (EOLCS )           Sales:  877-562-5187
             (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)     Sales:  877-562-5187                            (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)
             (+1) 202-682-8041                       (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)             (+1) 202-682-8041
             (Local and International)               (+1) 202-682-8041                       (Local and International)
     Email:  certification@api.org                   (Local and International)       Email:  training@api.org
     Web:    www.api.org/monogram            Email:  eolcs@api.org                   Web:    www.api-u.org
           --`,`,,``,,```,,`,,,,``,,``````,-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`--- Web: www.api.org/eolcs
     API Quality Registrar (APIQR™)                                                  API eMaintenance™
                                                           ™
     •  ISO 9001                             Motor Oil Matters                       Sales:  877-562-5187
     • ISO/TS 29001                          Sales:  877-562-5187                            (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)
     • ISO 14001                                     (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)             (+1) 202-682-8041
     • OHSAS 18001                                   (+1) 202-682-8041                       (Local and International)
     • API Spec Q1®                                  (Local and International)       Email:  apiemaint@api.org
     • API Spec Q2™                          Email:  motoroilmatters@api.org         Web:    www.apiemaintenance.com
     • API QualityPlus™                      Web:    www.motoroilmatters.org
     • Dual Registration                                                             API Standards
                                                                 ™
     Sales:  877-562-5187                    API Diesel Exhaust Fluid                Sales:  877-562-5187
             (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)     Certification Program                           (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)
             (+1) 202-682-8041               Sales:  877-562-5187                            (+1) 202-682-8041
             (Local and International)               (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)             (Local and International)
     Email:  certification@api.org                   (+1) 202-682-8041               Email:  standards@api.org
     Web:    www.api.org/apiqr                       (Local and International)       Web:    www.api.org/standards
                                             Email:  apidef@api.org
     API Training Provider Certification     Web:    www.apidef.org                  API Data™
                     ®
     Program (API TPCP )                                                             Sales:  877-562-5187
                                                               ™
     Sales:  877-562-5187                    API Perforator Design                           (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)
             (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)     Registration Program                            (+1) 202-682-8041
             (+1) 202-682-8041               Sales:  877-562-5187                            (Local and International)
             (Local and International)               (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)     Service: (+1) 202-682-8042
     Email:  tpcp@api.org                            (+1) 202-682-8041               Email:  data@api.org
     Web:    www.api.org/tpcp                        (Local and International)       Web:    www.api.org/data
                                             Email:  perfdesign@api.org
     API Individual Certification            Web:    www.api.org/perforators         API Publications
                 ™
     Programs (ICP )                                                                 Phone:  1-800-854-7179 
                                                        ™
     Sales:  877-562-5187                    API WorkSafe                                    (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)
             (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)     Sales:  877-562-5187                            (+1) 303-397-7956 
             (+1) 202-682-8041                       (Toll-free U.S. and Canada)             (Local and International)
             (Local and International)               (+1) 202-682-8041               Fax:    (+1) 303-397-2740
     Email:  icp@api.org                             (Local and International)       Web:    www.api.org/pubs
     Web:    www.api.org/icp                 Email:  apiworksafe@api.org                     global.ihs.com
                                             Web:    www.api.org/worksafe


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          --`,`,,``,,```,,`,,,,``,,``````,-`-`,,`,,`,`,,`---


                                                      Product No.                   C58301